Crafting Novels

Short Stories
The Complete Guide to Writing Great Fiction
From the editors of Writer’s Digest
Foreword by James Scott Bell

Cincinnati, Ohio
www.writersdigest.com

Contents
Foreword
Introduction

Focus on the Writing Life:
GETTING STARTED
GET OFF YOUR BUTT & WRITE by the Editors of Writer’s Digest YOUR NOVEL
BLUEPRINT by Karen S. Wiesner

Part 1. CHARACTERS:
The Stakeholders in Your Story
Chapter 1. DRAW CHARACTERS FROM THE STRONGEST
SOURCES
by Nancy Kress Chapter 2. EMOTION-DRIVEN CHARACTERS
by
David
Corbett
Chapter
3.
DEPICTING
CONVINCING
RELATIONSHIPS
by Elizabeth Sims Chapter 4. CREATE THE (IM)PERFECT HEROIC
COUPLE
by Leigh Michaels Chapter 5. CHOOSING YOUR CHARACTER
by Michael J. Vaughn Chapter 6. THREE TECHNIQUES FOR
CRAFTING YOUR VILLAIN
by Hallie Ephron Chapter 7. CREATE VICIOUS VILLAINS
by Charles Atkins
Focus on the Writing Life:
FEEDING YOUR CREATIVITY

CREATIVE LOLLYGAGGING. WORK HARDER AT WORKING LESS by Michael J.
Vaughn

Part 2. PLOT & CONFLICT:
Your Story’s Action & Suspense
Chapter 8. STORY TRUMPS STRUCTURE
by Steven James Chapter 9. MAP YOUR NOVEL WITH A REVERSE
OUTLINE
by N.M. Kelby Chapter 10. WRITE WELL-CRAFTED SCENES TO
SUPPORT YOUR STORY
by James Scott Bell Chapter 11. USE BRAIDING TO LAYER YOUR
STORY LINE
by Heather Sellers Chapter 12. CRAFT AN OPENING SCENE THAT
LURES READERS INTO Chapter TWO
by Les Edgerton Chapter 13. WRITE A FIVE-STAR Chapter ONE
by Elizabeth Sims Chapter 14. STRENGTHEN YOUR SCENES
by James Scott Bell Chapter 15. RESCUE YOUR STORY FROM PLOT
PITFALLS
by Laura Whitcomb
Focus on the Writing Life:
BEATING WRITER’S BLOCK
START ME UP by Elizabeth Sims

Part 3. POINT OF VIEW:
The Voice of Your Story
Chapter 16. UNDERSTANDING DIFFERENCES IN POV
by James V. Smith, Jr.
Chapter 17. USING PERCEPTION TO ENHANCE YOUR POV
by Alicia Rasley Chapter 18. POV CHARACTERS WHO OVERSTEP

THEIR BOUNDS
by Kristen Johnson Ingram Chapter 19.
POINTS OF VIEW
by Simon Wood

MASTERING MULTIPLE

Focus on the Writing Life:
USING YOUR MUSE
MAKE YOUR OWN MUSE by N.M. Kelby
FUELING YOUR MUSE WITH COMPOST by Heather Sellers

Part 4. SETTING & BACKSTORY:
The Context for Your Story
Chapter 20. CREATING YOUR STORY’S TIME & PLACE
by Donald Maass Chapter 21. REFINE YOUR SETTING SKILL SET
by Brian Kiteley Chapter 22. WHY BACKSTORY IS ESSENTIAL
by Larry Brooks Chapter 23. SIX WAYS TO LAYER IN BACKSTORY
by Hallie Ephron Chapter 24. WEAVE IN BACKSTORY TO REVEAL
CHARACTER
by Rachel Ballon Chapter 25. HOW TO BUILD SUSPENSE WITH
BACKSTORY
by Leigh Michaels
Focus on the Writing Life:
BALANCING WRITING WITH THE REST OF LIFE
MARRY YOUR LIFE TO YOUR WRITING by Sheila Bender
THE WRITE-AT-HOME MOM by Christina Katz

Part 5. DIALOGUE:
What Your Characters Say to Each Other
Chapter 26. AMP UP DIALOGUE WITH EMOTIONAL BEATS
by Todd A. Stone Chapter 27. WEAVE ACTION, NARRATIVE, &
DIALOGUE

by Gloria Kempton Chapter 28. AVOID WRITING SAME-OLD, SAMEOLD CONVERSATIONS
by Michael Levin
Focus on the Writing Life:
MAXIMIZING YOUR PRODUCTIVITY
REINVENTING YOUR RELATIONSHIP WITH TIME by Sage Cohen

Part 6. DESCRIPTION & WORD CHOICE:
What You Tell Readers
Chapter 29. BALANCING DESCRIPTION & SUMMARY
by Ron Rozelle Chapter 30. FOLLOW THE RULES FOR STRONGER
WRITING
by Nancy Lamb Chapter 31. KEEP YOUR STORY LEAN
by Nancy Kress Chapter 32. MAKE YOUR TONE PITCH-PERFECT
by Adair Lara Chapter 33.
UNDERSTANDING GENDER
DIFFERENCES
by Leigh Anne Jasheway
Focus on the Writing Life:
RESEARCHING YOUR WORK
RESEARCHING YOUR IDEAS by the Editors of Writer’s Digest

Part 7. REVISION:
How Your Story Comes Together
Chapter 34. HOW TO GAIN PERSPECTIVE ON YOUR WORK
by Elizabeth Sims Chapter 35. FIRE UP YOUR FICTION. FOUR
TECHNIQUES
by Donald Maass Chapter 36. WHAT TO DO WHEN YOUR NOVEL
STALLS
by John Dufresne Chapter 37. KEEP YOUR STORY MOVING AT THE

RIGHT PACE
by Jessica Page Morrell Chapter 38. PUT YOUR FICTION TO THE
PLAUSIBILITY TEST
by Steve Almond Chapter 39. TRANSFORM THAT OUT-OF-SHAPE
FIRST DRAFT
by Lin Enger
Focus on the Writing Life:
GETTING PUBLISHED
SELLING YOUR FICTION by the Editors of Writer’s Digest

Appendix A. FICTION GENRE DESCRIPTIONS
Appendix B. RESOURCES
Permissions
Copyright Page

Foreword
BY JAMES SCOTT BELL
When I was a freshly scrubbed law school graduate I went to work for a big civil
litigation firm in Beverly Hills. I wanted to be a trial lawyer and, having won my
law school’s coveted trial advocacy award, I was raring to go. Thought I knew it
all right out of the gate.
So the day came when one of the senior associates had a dinky little trial
coming up and didn’t want to be bothered. He asked me if I wanted to take it.
Take it? This was my big moment!
It was indeed a relatively small bench trial (one judge, no jury) but I treated
it like the Trial of the Century. When I showed up at the courthouse the other
attorney met me, shook my hand, and suggested in collegial tones that perhaps
we could settle this thing here and now. He asked to see the new evidence I was
going to present, which consisted of a few letters, and I showed him. He
conferred with his client and came back and made a settlement offer that was
way too low. The lawyer actually said he was now going to take this to trial. He
obviously didn’t know I was the second coming of Clarence Darrow.
When the trial got under way there was a moment when the opposing lawyer
stood up and addressed the judge. He told the judge I was withholding evidence
from the court. “I have seen this evidence and Mr. Bell is trying to deceive you,
Your Honor,” he said.
I was furious. I babbled incoherently. It threw me off my game. And even
though I won this one-day trial, the amount gained for my client was less than
what I thought it should be.
I complained angrily to the senior associate about how I was treated. He
snorted and sat me down. “Don’t you know the first rule of trial work? Don’t

ever trust the other lawyer.”
So simple. So pithy. It was advice I needed to hear before I walked into a
courtroom.
There is nothing so instructive in any endeavor of life as having an
experienced hand give you the benefit of his wisdom. Which is why I appreciate
the writing instruction presented in a good craft book like this one. It’s like
having that seasoned professional sit down with you and tell you things you
could only learn on your own after lots of trial and error, if you learn them at all.
When I was first trying to figure out how to write, I devoured the fiction
column in Writer’s Digest, then inked by the great Lawrence Block. I read it
every month as if it were a sacred page, underlining what jumped out at me. I
still have binders full of those back issues and have turned to them nostalgically
on occasion, always picking up a fresh tip or being reminded of one that I’d first
read there.
Likewise, I have an entire floor to ceiling bookcase with nothing but writing
books, all of them highlighted to one degree or another.
My philosophy has always been if I can learn just one thing from an article
or book on writing, it’s worth it. If there is one tip or technique that will lift my
writing to another level, I want to know it. I don’t ever want to rest as a writer.
Books like the one you are holding your hand are your friends in that regard.
The fact that it is a collection from a number of brilliant teachers of the craft
is a huge benefit. It’s like you get to sit at a large table for coffee with a group of
skilled instructors and listen to their insights while you take notes. In fact, it’s
better. You don’t have to pause and ask them to repeat something. You can linger
over a section of the book as long as you want.
But you must do more than that. You must put into practice what you learn.
When you read something that strikes you as relevant to your own writing
journey, figure out a way to practice it. Make up a writing exercise for yourself.
You’ll find many exercises already in the book, waiting for you. Don’t know
what to write? Try Elizabeth Sims’s “Random Sentence Kick-Start”.

Are your characters not coming to life as you’d like? Give them dreams, as
suggested by Nancy Kress.
If time to write is a problem, drink in Sage Cohen’s essay on how to be most
productive.
In fact, drink in this whole book. Linger over it. Keep it handy. You’ll find
yourself turning to it when you need to, and even before you need to. What you
have here is instructional gold. Mine it, refine it, use it. And follow three simple
rules:
1. Keep learning.
2. Keep writing.
3. Never trust the other lawyer.
—James Scott Bell

Introduction
Writing fiction requires grit and sensitivity. It’s an elusive craft. You chase it and
chase it, and you sometimes feel like you’ll never master it. The subtleties of
character, word choice, and revision make it imperative to stay in tune with
every element of your work, even as you relentlessly battle the writer’s selfconscious subconscious.
It’s daunting to say the least.
By picking up this book, you’ve taken a decisive step to prove your
dedication to the craft. In these pages you’ll find the know-how your need to fuel
your determination. That’s what this book is for. It pulls together the expert
writers, editors, and agents to give the best advice for every aspect of fiction
writing. With their wisdom, you’ll find your confident, compelling voice.
Whether you’re writing flash fiction, a short story, a novel, or an epic trilogy,
you’ll come away with a game plan for chasing the craft. With each chapter,
you’ll build your stamina and sharpen your fiction instincts.

THE TOOLS YOU NEED
Each part of the book will lead you through a focused look at one element of
strong storytelling. You’ll learn tips from experts that will give your work the
power to stand out.
Part 1 helps you define and refine your characters.
Part 2 provides the tools to make your plot and conflict high-energy and
intense.
Part 3 guides you as your hone your story’s point of view.
Part 4 gives a framework for weaving setting and backstory.
Part 5 helps you create dialogue that rings true.

Part 6 guides you as you select the right words and descriptions throughout
your story.
Part 7 is a complete guide to revising your story to perfection.
Each section gives you insights to help you find what works and what doesn’t
work in your story.
The Focus on the Writing Life sections will help you integrate your skills
into a balanced, productive, and fulfilling career.
Start at the beginning and read to the end or search for chapters that meet the
needs of the moment. Either way, your writing will be transformed.
Plus, at the end of the book you’ll find genre descriptions to help you
classify your work and a list of resources to help you delve further into the craft.
Let the voices in Crafting Novels & Short Stories be your guide as you
develop the grit and sensitivity to become a fiction master.

BONUS ONLINE EXCLUSIVE:
Download interviews with fiction masters like Stephen King, Kurt Vonnegut,
Anne Tyler, Margaret Atwood, and more at writersdigest.com/crafting-novelsshort-stories. Registration (it’s free!) and log-in is required to activate this
download link.
Find more great tips, networking, and advice by following @writersdigest on
Twitter
And become a fan of our Facebook page: facebook.com/writersdigest

Focus on the Writing Life:
GETTING STARTED

GET OFF YOUR BUTT & WRITE
BY THE EDITORS OF WRITER’S DIGEST
“So, what do you do?” asks the fellow dad at the soccer match, glancing over at
you while he keeps an eye on his daughter, the star forward.
“I’m a writer,” you announce proudly.
“That’s fascinating! Anything I would recognize?” he asks, while you both
cheer a save by your team’s goalie.
“Not yet,” you admit. “I haven’t had much luck yet in getting published.”
There is a pause while he makes a sympathetic-sounding cluck. “Actually, I
haven’t been writing much lately at all,” you continue. “Being home with the
kids takes so much of my energy that by the time they’re in bed at the end of the
day all I want to do is watch television. Plus, writing is so discouraging when
you can’t get someone to even look at your work.”
There is a beat while he processes this. “But, you’re a writer, right? How can
you be a writer without actually writing?”
This scene may cause you to chuckle with recognition or possibly to hang
your head in shame. Real writers write. Successful writers find the time every
day to hone their craft and meet their writing obligations—whether those
obligations are external (from editors) or internal (from an incontestable desire
to write). What usually separates good writers from bad ones (and often,

published writers from unpublished ones) is a strong work habit. That’s it. That’s
the big secret. Real writers work hard. In fact, most work ridiculously hard.
Professional writers know there’s nothing like a looming deadline to make
them focus on their work. In fact, the real problem for beginning writers is
usually not scrambling to meet a deadline, but simply organizing their time
efficiently enough to find time to write at a productive pace. All writers feel this
way from time to time. As other commitments encroach on our days, writing is
often pushed aside like an unpleasant chore.
Accomplishing your writing goals requires making a writing plan, which is a
time schedule that lists what you need to do and when.

CHOOSE TO WRITE
Everybody on the planet has the same amount of time every day. How we choose
to use that time makes some of us writers and others of us short-order cooks. If
you are a short-order cook who wants to write, however, you should probably
take a bit of time to think about how you use your time.
Sandra Felton, who has written more than a dozen books on how to get
organized, including Neat Mom, Messie Kids, and The New Messies Manual,
points to prioritizing and dedication as helpful organizational tools for writers. “I
think the whole answer is focus,” she says. “I think what focus means is you
have to decide what you want to do and lob off other stuff that you also want to
do. Because you want to write more.”
Note that the choice is not between writing and doing something else that
you don’t want to do. The choice is among a nearly overwhelming array of
things that seem appealing: checking in with your friends on Facebook, reading
for pleasure, or having people over for dinner. Then there’s going to movies and
the theater and the opera and family get-togethers and on trips and watching way
too much television. Sometimes people would even rather do laundry and dishes
than write. (All writers have days like that, but if that’s your constant M.O., you

may wish to rethink a literary vocation.) Faced with so many options, people
tend to choose too many and feel like they’re short of time.
Some people actually can use stray snippets of free time to write, penning
novels on the back of envelopes while waiting in the checkout line at the grocery
store. If they have ten minutes between helping a child with homework and
driving her to flute lessons, they use those ten precious minutes to write or polish
a small chunk of prose. Such people are the envy of the rest of us. For the rest of
us, writing for publication requires larger pieces of time to research, ponder,
draft, rewrite, and polish.

MAKE WRITING A HABIT
Finding writing time requires a modicum of organization, but using it
productively demands dedication. The theme of virtually every article about
getting organized to write is straightforward: Just do it. Wanting to write and
writing itself are cousins, not identical twins. Psychological research indicates
that writing every day, whether your muse is whispering in your ear or has
deserted you, produces not only more writing but also more ideas for future
writing.
The writing habit, like the exercise habit, is its own reward. When you don’t
do it, you feel as if you’re cheating yourself. Real writers don’t sit around and
wait for inspiration to strike before they put fingers to keyboard; they put fingers
to keyboard and know that somewhere during those hours they will discover
small nuggets of inspiration. The fingers-to-keyboard, butt-in-the-chair pose is
like exercise for the writer. In a way, this is just like real runners who pound the
pavement or the treadmill in all weather, whether they are busy with work or on
vacation. Like physical exercise, writing is often not enjoyable while you’re
doing it, though occasionally an endorphin or two will spark and the serotonin
does its thing. Most of the time, though, writing is just a matter of discipline,
plain and simple. Discipline comes more easily to some people than to others,
but it is certainly a skill that can be cultivated.

“The only thing I can tell you I do that’s inviolate is when I have to write, I
get up in the morning and literally go straight to the typewriter,” says Stephanie
Culp, who has written books on organization and time management. “Any little
distraction that takes me away from my desk kills it. When I’m writing
something large, it takes about three fitful days, and then I’m in the rhythm of it,
and I write it. I can still write a book in three weeks.”
Here are some tips for getting into a writing habit.
Start by setting aside an hour or a half hour every day to write.
Or make a goal to write a set number of words each day.
Try to write at the same time every day so it will feel peculiar to do
something else at that time.
Write even if you feel uninspired, even if you don’t feel ready to write. If
you want to be a writer, you must write.

YOUR WRITING PLAN
Often, getting started on a writing project is the hardest part. Most writing jobs,
however, can be viewed as a sequence of doable tasks that follow the same
general path from beginning to end. If you accomplish each task in order, you
can follow the plan to a finished piece. The more you write, the more you will be
able to anticipate how much time a particular project will take you.
The planning guidelines below help you break your book project into smaller
tasks. Start with individual chapters, and break down the chapters into
component parts. Schedule your writing project into your day at specific times,
and, with a little luck but more hard work, you’ll finish your pieces on time.
If you’re a person who resents and resists scheduling, remember that creating
a writing plan is intended to help you, not restrict you. The goal is to relieve
some stress, organize your life, and make your writing process more efficient.
Meeting even mini deadlines can lift your spirits and bolster your confidence.

Simply crossing items off to-do lists feels so good that the act in itself becomes a
reward and keeps you writing.
Take a look at the following guidelines, which will help you better organize
your writing time and, in turn, finish your projects.
1. SET REASONABLE, MEASURABLE GOALS. Even if you’re not writing
to someone else’s external deadline, give yourself your own deadline and treat it
seriously. Because you understand the power of the written word, write down a
specific goal, with a due date: “Finish chapter by [whatever date].” Some people
even establish a punishment and/or reward if they meet or don’t meet their selfimposed deadlines: “If I complete chapter five by Friday, I can go to see a
movie; if I don’t finish on time, I will force myself to scrub the toilets as
penance.” Well, you don’t have to clean the toilets, but a little self-flagellation is
probably good for you.
2. DIVIDE AND CONQUER. View your writing project not as an
overwhelming monolith, but a compilation of many smaller items. The reason
hard jobs get bypassed is that they often seem too daunting if they’re written as
one entry on your list of goals. For example, “Write a book in the next year” can
be overwhelming. The scope of the project is so big, and the deadline so far
away, that achieving the goal seems impossible. Instead, focus on smaller tasks
to do today, tomorrow, this week, and this month to help you reach that goal.
You’re likelier to accomplish smaller tasks in the near future than a vague goal in
the abstract faraway. The tasks help you reach that distant goal step-by-step.
3. CREATE A PLAN OF ORDERED TASKS. Writing down tasks in the order
in which they should be done keeps you focused, as well as frees your mind to
concentrate on the important things—rather than wasting mental energy trying to
remember all the niggling details that must be done each day. Break the task
down into manageable steps.
4. SELECT DATES AND STICK TO THEM. “Someday, I’m going to write a

book.” How many times have we all thought this? Turn your lofty dream into an
actual accomplishment by adopting a workable schedule. For example, choose a
date on your calendar for beginning your writing project. Make it today. You’ll
be surprised by how much more quickly you’ll work with deadlines, especially if
they come with positive and negative consequences. For example, if you miss
your deadline at a major magazine, you may never be hired again and may in
fact not see your piece in print, which are both negative consequences. But if
you make your deadline, determine that you will give yourself a real day off, a
massage, an entire chocolate cake, or what have you. Enlist other people to hold
you accountable.
5. WORK BACKWARD. The most important step in planning the time for your
writing project is this one: On your calendar, mark the story’s final due date. (If
you don’t have a deadline from a publisher, give yourself a reasonable one.)
Then figure out when each of the specific items, in reverse order, must be
completed if you are to meet that deadline. Allow a little wiggle room in your
calendar for the delays that inevitably happen: an interviewee gets the flu and
has to postpone by a few days, the computer crashes, etc.
Next to each item on your list, write the time you think it will take to accomplish
it and the deadline for completing it. People commonly put far too many items
on their to-do list and, as a result, feel defeated when they have to copy
uncompleted items from day to day. As William James once wrote, “Nothing is
so fatiguing as the eternal hanging on of an uncompleted task.” So jot down
what you can reasonably expect to accomplish in a day. Some people have
success using online organizational websites to help them stay on track. For
example, on www.Toodledo.com, users can create goals for themselves, color
code them, assign themselves deadlines, prioritize the tasks in a “hotlist,” and
keep track of the time spent on each project. There are other similar sites as well,
including many that are compatible with PDAs and smart phones. (Of course,
the old-fashioned system of a pen and a sticky note works fine, too.)

YOUR NOVEL BLUEPRINT
BY KAREN S. WIESNER
Writing a novel and building a house are pretty similar when you think about it.
For instance, most builders or homeowners spend a lot of time dreaming about
their ideal houses, but there comes a time when they have to wake up to the
reality of building by analyzing what they expect from a house and whether the
plans they’ve selected will meet their needs. Architects argue that it’s better to
build from the inside out.
This is where a home plan checklist comes in handy. This list assembles the
key considerations to keep in mind when deciding on a plan, including what are
called external monologues, which relate primarily to the outside of a house and
its environment, and internal (interior) monologues. (The word monologue, in
building, refers to a single facet of overall composition on the inside or outside
of a house, such as flooring material or landscaping aspects.) Writers spend a lot
of time dreaming about their ideal story. Eventually they have to face reality and
analyze whether or not the story will work. Authors, too, usually build from the
inside out—in other words, they know what they want at the heart of their stories
and they build around that.
This is where a story plan checklist becomes essential, because it targets the
key considerations necessary when building a cohesive story that readers will
find unforgettable. The checklist has basic external and internal monologues.
Monologue, in writing, refers to a single facet of overall composition concerning
the internal or external elements, such as conflict and motivation. Generally,
these are composed individually in free-form summaries, but they need to
develop and grow cohesively.
The story plan checklist can ensure cohesion between character, setting and
plot. This checklist connects all the dots between internal and external conflicts,

and goals and motivations, thereby guaranteeing the cohesion all stories require.
In its most simplified form, a story plan checklist includes free-form summaries
(or monologues) covering each of the following:
Part I: THE BASICS
Working Title
Working Genre(s)
Working Point-of-View Specification
High-Concept Blurb
Story Sparks
Estimated Length of Book/Number of Sparks
Part II: EXTERNAL MONOLOGUES
Identifying the Main Character(s)
Character Introductions
Description (outside POV)
Description (self POV)
Occupational Skills
Enhancement/Contrast
Symbolic Element (character and/or plot defining)
Setting Descriptions
Part III: INTERNAL MONOLOGUES
Character Conflicts (internal)
Evolving Goals and Motivations
Plot Conflicts (external)
While you’re in the beginning stages of forming a story plan, sit down and figure
out some of the working details (which may change throughout the process).

THE BASICS OF A STORY CHECKLIST
Title and Genre Specification
First, come up with a preliminary title. All you need here is something to
reference the project. While you don’t want to lock in your genre too early
(stories evolve in unpredictable ways), get started with genre specification. For
now, list all the genres this story could fit into.
POV Specification
Now start thinking about what point of view you want to use for your book.
It’s very important to start your story plan checklist with this because the
identities of your main characters will play a huge part in your characterization
and, subsequently, each of the areas you’ll be summarizing on your checklist.
Most stories spark with a character who may end up becoming your main
character. Your best bet for deciding which character’s viewpoint to use: In any
scene, stick to the view of the character with the most at stake—the one with the
most to lose or gain.
High-Concept Blurb
The high-concept blurb is a tantalizing sentence—or a short paragraph with
up to four sentences (one or two is ideal)—that sums up your entire story, as well
as the conflicts, goals, and motivations of the main character(s). It’s no easy task.
Here’s a simplified explanation of what your sentence needs to contain:
(name of character) wants (goal to be achieved) because (motivation for
acting), but she faces (conflict standing in the way).
Story Sparks
At this point in the checklist, we’ve established the basics of the story and
we’re ready for the beginning spark—so crucial to drawing a reader’s interest—
followed by the initial external and internal monologues on the story plan
checklist. Here you’ll begin the cohesive development of your story.

A story spark is something intriguing that ignites a story scenario and carries
it along toward fruition. It’s that “aha!” moment when a writer thinks up
something that completely captures his imagination, and he must see how it
unfurls and concludes. I dare say there’s not a writer alive who hasn’t come up
with one idea that blows the mind. However, most don’t realize that a story has
to have more than one of these sparks to sustain it. A story spark must infuse and
reinfuse the story, and a new one must be injected at certain points in order to
support the length and complexity of the story.
Most novels up to 75,000 words have three story sparks: one for the
beginning, one for the middle, and one for the end. The beginning spark sets up
the conflict. The middle spark (or possibly more than one middle spark)
complicates the situation. Finally, the end spark resolves the conflict and
situation. Short stories, flash fiction, and novellas usually have only one or two
sparks (beginning and ending). All of these sparks absolutely must be cohesive
to ensure a solid story.
Estimated Length of Book/Number of Sparks
The more sparks you include, the longer and more complex your book will
be. It’s hard to get around that, so plan accordingly. With that in mind, a story of
more than 75,000 words may have an excess of three basic sparks, especially in
the middle, because a longer story needs complexity to sustain it. A middle story
spark can appear anywhere after the beginning one—before the end—though it
usually appears somewhere toward the halfway mark of the book.
To give you a basic idea of how many sparks you’ll need for a novel, you can
figure that if you have an estimated 250 words per page:
up to 75,000 words = 300 pages (3 sparks)
90,000 words = 360 pages (4 sparks)
100,000 words = 400 pages (4+ sparks)

You might also make a note about where you want to place the extra spark(s). In
general, extra sparks should come in the beginning or middle of the book.

EXTERNAL MONOLOGUE
Identifying the Main Character(s)
If you have no idea who your main characters are, chances are this particular
story needs a lot more brainstorming. Even if your story is more plot oriented
than character oriented, brainstorming on your characters until you can fully
envision them will help immensely.
In this section of the checklist, simply list the names of the main characters.
While a complex book will have more primary and secondary characters, most
75,000-to 90,000-word stories have, at least in terms of main characters, a hero,
a heroine, and/or a villain.
Character Introductions
The introduction of a character in the story plan checklist is a springboard
into finding out more about him. It’s like meeting someone for the first time—
you say your name and a few pertinent details about yourself. In the checklist,
you list a name and the character’s role in the story. Each of your main
characters will have particular skills that are shaped specifically for the plot, and
that’s really what you’re introducing in this section of the checklist. Some of
these could and should be carefully selected occupational skills, but most will go
far deeper than that.
Character Descriptions From Outside Viewpoints
If you’re using a third-person omniscient POV, chances are your main
characters will be described by other characters. Although this kind of
description can include physical appearances, it should always incorporate
impressions made by your characters upon the ones around them. You can
describe the main characters from each individual viewpoint in the book. Or

your summary can simply encompass the most basic impressions without
ascribing them to the person offering them.
Character Descriptions From Self Viewpoint
Very few people describe themselves the same way others do. That makes it
even more important for main characters to describe themselves, because the
reader gets a strong sense of who your players are with both outside and inside
descriptions. In essence, these are like mini first-person profiles. The characters
talk about themselves and sometimes give their impressions of others.
Character Occupational Skills
Especially in a work of fiction, what the characters do is pivotal to their
personalities and motivations. Just about everything hinges on these interests,
hobbies, or jobs. What the character does for a living (or doesn’t do, if he
doesn’t have a job), gives him the necessary skills to deal with the conflicts he’s
facing in the story. To build the form of cohesion we’ve been talking about, the
character’s skills should be directly related to either his internal or external
conflicts. In the best-case scenario, his skills will connect to both in some way.
Enhancement/Contrast
If you want to create a truly unique character—and what writer doesn’t?—
the best way to do so is by providing her personality with enhancements and
contrasts. Enhancements are the subtle, balanced, or extreme elements that
complement what the writer has already established as traits for that character.
Enhancements are personality traits that make a character uniquely larger than
life. A writer can’t create a truly average Joe because he would be boring to read.
In the fictional world, an author may present a hero who seems ordinary at first
glance, but something makes him stand apart. This something may not be
revealed until later, when his quality is tested.
A contrast, which can also be subtle and quite nuanced, balanced or extreme,
is an element that’s in opposition to what the writer has already established as

traits for that character. A personality contrast is one of the best and most
frequently used ways of making a character rise memorably to the spotlight. Few
readers want to know a hero who advertises “Hero for Hire—Inquire Within” on
a sign outside his office. The hero who’s optimistic to a fault, whiter than snow
and perfect in every way, is dull.
Flawed (but likeable!) characters are the ones readers root for, because a
character without flaws or fears is a character without conflicts. Readers know
that true courage is facing what you fear most, pursuing your goals, and not
giving up even when there’s little chance of success. Readers go crazy for a
rough and raw, imperfect hero, with more baggage (of the emotional kind) than a
pampered socialite. An eternal pessimist, she wants nothing to do with the title,
let alone the job; she’s only forced into it by an oft-buried sense of nobility or
because something or someone she cares about deeply is in danger.
One way to develop a main character is by introducing another main,
secondary or minor character (love interest, family member, friend, or villain)
who either enhances or contrasts his personality. You’ll see the saving-herselffor-marriage woman paired with a slutty best friend. The street-smart guy with
the 4.0 GPA buddy. The happily married accountant with 2.5 kids, living
vicariously through his footloose, unfettered college buddy who’s been to every
corner of the globe on one hair-raising adventure after another.
As a general rule, a character who’s an extremist in any regard (whether
hard, obsessive, ruthless, or something else) will need someone or something to
soften her. In a character who’s more balanced, an enhancement or contrast may
be more subtle, but should be just as effective. Whatever you do, choose
characteristics that’ll be necessary at some point in the book, that don’t hit the
reader over the head, and that advance each story element.
Symbolic Element
Another effective means of developing character is to give him a symbol that
defines him, defines the situation he’s in, or both. These symbols are sometimes

called by the music term leitmotif. In the writing world, we use them to associate
characters, objects, events, and emotions. Each appearance makes them more
intense and meaningful.
Whether you make symbols subtle or well defined, they take on layers of
meaning each time they’re mentioned, and they become an integral part of the
story. As a general rule, every character should have only one associated symbol,
but if you have a total of two in the book, one of them should be subtle, while
the other should be well defined. The point is to enhance or contrast, not take
over the story so the symbol becomes the focal point when you have no desire
for it to be.
The symbol can be tangible, in the form of something that defines the
character, setting, and plot in some way—a piano, pet, flower, key, map, or
necklace—but it doesn’t have to be. It can be a trait or mannerism the character
uses frequently that says something about him and/or develops the character,
setting, and plot. It can also be a hobby or vice, or a disability or disfigurement,
such as a scar. This tangible or intangible symbol also must be cohesive and not
thrown in for the fun of it. In one way or another, it has to enhance or contrast—
and thereby develop—your story in deeper ways.
Build in symbols to make your plot, setting, and characters a seamless trinity.
The nice thing about incorporating cohesive symbols is that while it’s ideal to do
this before you begin writing the book, it’s never too late to come up with them.
Setting Descriptions
Your setting is a basis for building your story—it enhances the characters,
conflict, and suspense, and provides a place for all three to flourish. If your
setting doesn’t match the other elements, you’ll work harder at creating fitting
characters and plots. Additionally, it will be hard to create the appropriate mood.
In any case, you’ll have to find a skillful way to play against the contrast of
setting.

The importance of creating a setting cohesive with character and plot can be
illustrated by imagining different settings for classic novels. What if Moby Dick,
instead of being set at sea, had been set in, say, a lighthouse? Moby Dick
wouldn’t have been the novel that’s become so well known if the setting had
been anywhere else but where the author put it.
Describe your setting in such a way that it not only becomes evident how the
characters and plot fit there, but supercharges your whole story. What does the
setting reveal about the character’s personality? What in the setting means the
most to him? How will this setting create the stage for conflict and suspense?
How can you make it so real that your reader will believe the place actually
exists?
The purpose in writing setting descriptions is to allow the reader to “see”
what the main character sees, as well as to give a sense of the characters. Very
few characters will notice every detail of their surroundings. A character notices
the things in his setting that are important to him at the moment. In other words,
focus the description. Describe only what means the most to the character, what
enhances the mood you’re attempting to create. If the description doesn’t
advance some part of the character, setting, or plot development, it’s probably
unnecessary.

INTERNAL MONOLOGUE
The crucial need for cohesive character, setting, and plot becomes boldly evident
in these next steps—which are truly the heart of your story. Life is conflict, and
fiction even more so. Without conflict, you don’t have a story. For every spark
your story has, you’ll check off one of each of the following items for all the
major characters. This is optional for secondary and minor characters.
Character Conflicts (Internal)
Internal character conflicts are emotional problems brought about by
external conflicts that make a character reluctant to achieve a goal because of her

own roadblocks. They keep her from learning a life lesson and making the
choice to act.
In fiction, character conflicts are why plot conflicts can’t be resolved. Simply
put, the character can’t reach his goal until he faces the conflict. The audience
must be able to identify with the internal and external conflicts the character
faces in order to be involved and to care about the outcome. Character growth
throughout the story is key to a satisfactory resolution.
Keep in mind that clearly defined conflicts are ones that won’t hit your
reader over the head or frustrate her. If you as the writer don’t quite understand
the conflicts in your story, your instinct will be to compensate by bombarding
the story with unfocused ideas. The reader won’t find it any easier to sort
through them and identify the true conflict. Vaguely defined conflicts usually
lead to the reader putting down a book for good.
Your first story spark will usually suggest what the character’s conflicts are,
and they’re almost always based on someone or something threatening what the
character cares about passionately. In some instances, a loved one is in jeopardy
or something the character wants, needs, or desires above all is at risk of being
lost. It’s your job to give the character incentives not to give up until everyone is
safe and he has what he’s fighting for.
Internal and external conflicts depend on each other, and therefore they need
to be cohesive. Internal conflicts are all about characters, and external conflicts
are all about plot. But keep this in mind, lest confusion creep in: Both internal
and external plots belong to the main character(s). After all, if both didn’t affect
him in some profound way, they wouldn’t be conflicts, and therefore wouldn’t
even be part of his story.
Evolving Goals and Motivation
Goals are what the character wants, needs, or desires above all else.
Motivation is what gives her drive and purpose to achieve those goals. Goals

must be urgent enough for the character to go through hardship and selfsacrifice.
Multiple goals collide and impact the characters, forcing tough choices.
Focused on the goal, the character is pushed toward it by believable, emotional,
compelling motivations that won’t let him quit. Because he cares deeply about
the outcome, his anxiety is doubled. The intensity of his anxiety pressures him to
make choices and changes, thereby creating worry and awe in the reader.
Goals and motivations are constantly evolving (growing in depth, intensity,
and scope) to fit character and plot conflicts. Your character’s goals and
motivations will evolve every time you introduce a new story spark because
she’s modifying her actions based on the course her conflicts are dictating.
Beginning goals and motivations don’t generally change as much as they
become refined to the increasing intensity of the conflicts—though they must be
clarified in the case of complex novels, especially mysteries that must include
red herrings and foils to keep the reader guessing.
Plot Conflicts (External)
External plot conflict is the tangible central or outer problem standing
squarely in the character’s way. It must be faced and solved. The character wants
to restore the stability that was taken from him by the external conflict, and this
produces his desire to act. However, a character’s internal conflicts will create an
agonizing tug-of-war with the plot conflicts. He has to make tough choices that
come down to whether or not he should face, act on, and solve the problem.
Plot conflicts must be so urgent as to require immediate attention. The
audience must be able to identify with both the internal and external conflicts the
character faces in order to be involved enough to care about the outcome. Plot
conflicts work hand in glove with character conflicts. You can’t have one
without the other, and they become more intense and focused the longer the
characters struggle. The stakes are raised, choices are limited, and failure and
loss are inevitable.

The first layer of a story is created when you plan for and lay the foundation.
By using a checklist and analyzing the monologues, you’ll be prepared to craft
an extremely strong initial layer—one capable of supporting everything you
build on it afterward.
KAREN S. WIESNER is the author of First Draft in 30 Days, From First Draft to Finished Novel,
and more than fifty other titles.

Part 1
CHARACTERS:
The Stakeholders in Your Story

Chapter 1

DRAW CHARACTERS FROM THE STRONGEST SOURCES
BY NANCY KRESS
Every drama requires a cast. The cast may be so huge, as in Leo Tolstoy’s Anna
Karenina, that the author or editor provides a list of characters to keep them
straight. Or it may be an intimate cast of two. (In ‘‘To Build a Fire,’’ Jack
London managed with one person and a dog.) But whatever the size of your cast,
you have to assemble it from somewhere.
Where do you get these people? And how do you know they’ll make good
characters?
You have four key sources: yourself, real people you know, real people you
hear about, and pure imagination.

YOURSELF AS CHARACTER: STRAIGHT FROM THE
SOURCE
In one sense, every character you create will be yourself. You’ve never
murdered, but your murderer’s rage will be drawn from memories of your own
extreme anger. Your love scenes will contain hints of your own past kisses and
sweet moments. That scene in which your octogenarian feels humiliated will
draw on your experience of humiliation in the eighth grade, even though the
circumstances are totally different and you’re not even consciously thinking
about your middle-school years. Our characters’ emotions, after all, draw on our
own emotions.
Sometimes, however, you will want to use your life more directly in your
fiction, dramatizing actual incidents. Charles Dickens used his desperate stint as
a child laborer in Victorian England to write David Copperfield. Nora Ephron,

best-selling author of Heartburn, was frank about basing her story of adultery
and desertion on her own experiences with husband Carl Bernstein (fiction as
public revenge).
Should you create a protagonist based directly on yourself? The problem
with this—and it is a very large problem—is that almost no one can view
himself objectively on the page. As the writer, you’re too close to your own
complicated makeup.
It can thus be easier and more effective to use a situation or incident from
your life but make it happen to a character who is not you. In fact, that’s what
the authors cited earlier largely have done. Rachel Samstat, Ephron’s heroine, is
sassier and funnier than any real person whose husband left her would be. You
can still, of course, incorporate aspects of yourself: your love of Beethoven, your
quick temper, your soccer injuries. But by applying your own experience to a
different protagonist, you can take advantage of your insider knowledge of the
situation, and yet gain an objectivity and control that the original intense
situation, by definition, did not have.

PEOPLE YOU KNOW AS CHARACTERS: BORROWING
TRAITS
Many famous characters are based, in part, on real people. The key words here
are in part. Like characters based on yourself, fictional creations based on others
seem to be most effective when they’re cannibalized. Using people exactly as
they are can limit both imagination and objectivity. So instead of using your
Uncle Jerome as is, combine his salient traits with those of other acquaintances
or with purely made-up qualities. This has several advantages.
First, you can craft exactly the character you need for your plot. Suppose, for
instance, that your actual Uncle Jerome is quick tempered and cuttingly witty
when angered and remorseful later about the things he said. But your character
would work better if he were a stranger to remorse, staying angry in a cool,

unrepentant way. Combine Uncle Jerome with your friend Don, who can really
hold a grudge. Combining characters gives you flexibility.
This is how Virginia Woolf created Clarissa Dalloway (Mrs. Dalloway). Her
primary source, according to biographer Quentin Bell, was family friend Kitty
Maxse. But Woolf also wrote in her diary that she drew on Lady Ottoline
Morrell for Clarissa: ‘‘I want to bring in the despicableness of people like Ott.’’
Similarly, Emma Bovary (Gustave Flaubert’s Madame Bovary) and spymaster
George Smiley (John le Carré’s series) are composites of people their creators
knew.

STRANGERS AS CHARACTERS: ONE SMALL SPARK
In addition to composites of people you know, you can also base characters on
people you have only heard or read about. This can work well because you’re
not bound by many facts. You’re making up the character, with the real person
providing no more than a stimulus for inspiration.
Say you read about a woman whose will leaves $6 million to a veterinary
hospital she visited only once, forty years earlier, with her dying cat. You never
met this woman. All you have is the newspaper story. But something about the
situation has caught your attention. What kind of person would do that? You
begin to imagine this woman: her personality and history, what that cat must
have meant to her, why there were no other people important enough to her to
leave them any inheritance.
Before long, you’ve created a full, interesting, and poignant character,
someone you might want to write about. Yes, you started with secondhand
information—but now the character is fully yours.
As Charlotte Brontë famously remarked, reality should ‘‘suggest’’ rather than
‘‘dictate’’ characters.

CHARACTERS FROM IMAGINATION: FANCY RUNS FREE

Creating purely invented characters is similar to basing characters on strangers.
With strangers, a small glimpse into another life sparks the imagination. Madeup characters, too, usually begin with the spark of an idea. The writer then fans
the spark into a full-blown person.
William Faulkner, for example, had a sudden mental image of a little girl
with muddy drawers up in a tree. That image became Caddy in The Sound and
the Fury.
Exercises
1. Write mini bios for your dream cast
Make a list of characters you either might want to write about or have begun to write about.
Three or four will do. Fill out a mini bio for each, listing the basics: age, name, marital status,
family ties, occupation, appearance, and general thoughts and feelings.
Now study each mini bio, imagining that character as the star of your story. He will
receive the most attention from you and the readers, the highest word count, the emotional
arc (if there is one), and the climactic scene. How does the story change when you recast it?
2. Draw inspiration from the news
Read today’s newspaper and look for people who spark your imagination. When you find one,
write down everything you actually know about this person. Next, fill out a mini bio similar to
those you created in the previous exercise, inventing answers to the questions you don’t
know. Is this someone you’d like to build a story around?
3. Recast a classic
Pick a novel or story you like and know well, and list the major characters. Look at each one
and think how different the story would be with a different star. Take, for instance, Sleeping
Beauty. If the princess were not the heroine but instead a featured player (maybe even a bit
player), who might star? Perhaps the prince, with the story becoming his struggle to find a
bride. Or perhaps the bad fairy who put a spell on the princess—whatever happened to her?
In fact, some of these stories have been written. Same plot, different stars.

FINAL THOUGHTS ON CREATING A PROTAGONIST
Characters usually present themselves encased in at least the rudiments of a
fictional situation. Caddy is up in a tree (why?). The deceased lady has left $6

million to an animal hospital. You have something here to work with. Your next
task is to look hard at this character/situation in order to decide if the character is
strong enough to sustain a story.
NANCY KRESS is the author of twenty-eight books, including Write Great Fiction: Characters,
Emotion & Viewpoint. Her work has garnered her four Nebula Awards and two Hugo Awards.

Chapter 2

EMOTION-DRIVEN CHARACTERS
BY DAVID CORBETT
The source and exact nature of the curious phenomena we refer to as characters
remains something of a mystery, but the craft of characterization is not.
Although it’s clearly a cause for celebration—or at least relief—when a
character appears in the mind’s eye fully formed, the reality is that for most of
us, this is a rare occurrence. Certain techniques are required to will our
characters to life. We need to draw on the unconscious, memory, the
imagination, and the Muse until our characters quicken, assume clear form, and
with hope, begin to act of their own accord.
Can this process—so inherent to the success of any novel—really be
condensed into a single method? In my experience as both writer and writing
instructor, the answer is, to some extent, yes. The key is first to understand what
your characters require from you in order to come to life and then to determine
how you can draw on your best available resources to give them what they need.
The most compelling characters are those who appear internally consistent
and yet are capable of surprise. In my own work, I’ve found that the art of
crafting such fully realized characters can be boiled down to four crucial
elements: a driving need, desire, ambition, or goal; a secret; a contradiction; and
vulnerability. Let’s take a closer look at each one.

A DRIVING NEED, DESIRE, OR AMBITION
The fundamental truth to characterization is that characters must want
something, and the stronger the want, the more compelling the resulting drama.

This is because desire intrinsically creates conflict, the primordial goo in which
character is formed.
Take, for example one of the most memorable characters in American
literature—Blanche Dubois, from Tennessee Williams’ A Streetcar Named
Desire. At the start of the story, Blanche has lost her family home and has been
left with nowhere to stay. Desperate, she has come to New Orleans to find her
sister, Stella, and ask to be taken in.
This is a perfect demonstration that simply by giving the character a deepseated need or want, you can automatically create conflict, for the world is not
designed to answer our desires as easily as we might hope.

A SECRET
For your character, a secret is that inclination or trait (such as a psychological
disposition to dishonesty, violence, sexual excess, or the abuse of alcohol or
drugs, to name a few) or an incident from the past that, if revealed, would
change forever the character’s standing in her world, among co-workers,
neighbors, friends, family, lovers. Secrets inform us of what our characters have
to lose, and why.
Drawing on the example of Blanche Dubois, her secret is that through drink
and illicit sexual liaisons, she has become so emotionally and physically
dissipated she could not hold on to the family home.
We are our own best source for understanding secrets. We know our own,
and if we’re insightful, we understand how they affect our behavior—
specifically, how they make us afraid.

A CONTRADICTION
We all know people who are both shy and rude, cruel but funny, bigoted but
protective. This complexity, which seems to particularly manifest itself during
times of stress or conflict, is what can make a person inherently unpredictable,

setting the stage for the kind of surprising behavior that can keep readers
enthralled, wondering what might happen next.
Our senses and minds are tuned to focus on irregularities—the thing that
doesn’t quite fit, doesn’t make sense, or is simply changing. This is an
evolutionarily adaptive trait; it helps in analyzing the environment for threats.
But it also attunes us to whatever is unusual in what we perceive; contradictions
reveal what we couldn’t predict, the enigma, the surprise.
Again, let’s look at how this applies to Blanche Dubois: She is desperate and
weak, hopelessly vain, with an alcoholic’s capacity for denial and delusion—but
she is also fiercely proud and resourceful with a surprising steeliness. It’s
contradictions like these that can automatically pique a reader’s interest.

VULNERABILITY
Nothing draws us into a character more than her vulnerability. When people
appear wounded or in need of our help, we are instantly drawn to them—it’s a
basic human reflex. We may also sometimes be repelled or frightened, but either
way, the fact of the matter is that injury to another person instantly triggers a
strong response.
Obviously vulnerability may be the result of the character’s secret: He is
afraid of being found out. Or it may come from the intensity of his need or want
—because, as we all know, desire can render us naked in a fundamental way. For
your character, the ambition and focus inherent in a strong desire can imply
some form of inner strength, while at the same time rendering the character
vulnerable to being deprived of what he most wants.
Blanche’s desperation to find a safe place makes her vulnerable, as does the
tawdry nature of her secrets, which threaten to shame her beyond redemption if
revealed. In other words, needs or desires, secrets, contradictions, and
vulnerability are almost always interconnected.

DEEPENING CHARACTERIZATIONS

Often our characters first appear to us as we flesh out the idea for a story. But
characters who emerge from story ideas can often be flat or two-dimensional;
this is because at that early stage, they serve the purpose of filling a role, rather
than acting as independent beings with needs and fears and affections and
concerns “outside the story.”
Compelling characters are not cogs in the machine of your plot; they are
human beings to whom the story happens.
Some stories begin with the characters, of course, and the narrative emerges
from an exploration of their needs, their defenses, their secrets and
contradictions, or some problem they face. The trick in those cases is making
sure the narrative doesn’t meander, creating, as writer Philip Larkin called it, “a
beginning, a muddle, and an end.”
But more often in mainstream fiction and especially genre fiction, the novel
begins with a story idea, and the characters need to be fleshed out to keep them
from being stock players in the drama. We might wonder how many uniquely
memorable world-weary detectives there can be, for example—and yet every
year at least one more seems to emerge from the wave of crime novels crashing
onto bookstore shelves. It takes skill and insight to breathe life into stock
characters, something too often dismissed by those who disdain genre fiction as
inferior.
So how do we flesh out our characters when they arise from the needs of our
stories or when they otherwise lack the specificity, uniqueness, or power
necessary to engage a reader (or the writer)? The best inspiration often comes
from within us—and from our experiences with the people in our lives.
Real-Life Characters
Near the end of his life, John Updike wrote a poem titled “Peggy Lutz, Fred
Muth,” in which he thanked his childhood friends and classmates—the “beauty”
and “bully,” the “fatso” and others—“for providing a sufficiency of human types
… all a writer needs.”

Whether we know it or not, our minds and hearts are populated by all the
characters we will ever need—though we may disassemble them and rearrange
the parts into composites for variation.
To fully tap this potential, begin by reflecting upon the following real people
in your life—jot down their names, fix them in your mind, remember a few
details about their lives, their physical appearances, the effect they’ve had on
you, and anything else you think would be important if you were to describe
them to someone who didn’t already know them.
Include in your exploration:
A family member you feel particularly close to
A family member you particularly dislike, or from whom you’re estranged
Your closest friend from childhood with whom you’ve lost touch
Your closest friend from childhood with whom you’re still in contact
A stranger whose path crossed yours this past week
A person you know personally and admire
A person you know personally and fear
The love who got away
The love you wished had gotten away
Your first love
Your greatest love
Your greatest childhood nemesis
Your greatest adulthood nemesis
The person from childhood who annoyed you the most
The person who annoys you the most now
Your favorite neighbor
Your least-favorite neighbor
Your favorite co-worker
Your least-favorite co-worker
Your postman or someone else you deal with on a “business” level daily

An older person who has inspired you
A child who fascinates you
Someone for whom you harbor a secret crush or feel sexual attraction
Someone you believe has a crush on you
A person who believed in you
A person who thought you would never amount to anything
A person whose life you would never trade for your own
The list can go on, of course; it’s limited only by one’s own inventiveness. But
writing out such a list provides a larger cast of characters than we originally
might have realized we possessed. We can sometimes unwittingly get into ruts,
writing variations on the same character over and over—the overbearing parent,
the needy lover, the insufferable phony, the lonely aunt. The value of using
people we know to inspire our characters is that we already see them so vividly
and specifically.
Emotional Triggers
Of course, we know a great deal about the people in our lives, but we don’t
know everything—and this is why real people provide excellent but not perfect
source material for characters. We will also have to draw on our own lives, at
least as a starting point, to fathom a character’s inner world.
It often surprises me how frequently writers, especially young writers, fail to
explore the rich veins of emotion they possess in their own lives, so they can
translate that to their characterizations.
The most important emotional incidents to explore in a character’s life—and
one’s own—are:
THE MOMENT OF GREATEST FEAR: This is perhaps the most
important emotional trigger, because almost all of our limitations, failures,
frustrations, and disappointments—and thus our secrets and vulnerabilities—
can be traced back to or relate to some fundamental fear.

THE MOMENT OF GREATEST COURAGE: This may be physical
valor, moral isolation, or simply persisting in the face of some dread.
THE MOMENT OF GREATEST SORROW: Death, grief, loss.
THE MOMENT OF GREATEST JOY: It’s strange how nebulous
moments of joy can seem—and what a loss. At what stage in your
character’s life (or in your own) did the golden moment occur? What’s
happened since?
THE WORST FAILURE: Ouch, I know, but don’t shun this moment; from
a writer’s point of view, it’s golden (as are all our travails, sorrows,
embarrassments, and screwups—embrace them).
THE MOMENT OF DEEPEST SHAME: Shame is connected to selfimage, and this moment will be when that image was seriously undermined
in a particularly personal way in front of others.
THE MOMENT OF MOST PROFOUND GUILT: This involves some
violation of a moral code. It may also make us ashamed, but guilt involves
having knowingly done something wrong.
THE MOMENT OF MOST REDEMPTIVE FORGIVENESS: If you’ve
been forgiven for some serious wrong, it’s not likely you’ve forgotten it. It’s
permitted you to regain your place with some crucial loved one.
When performing this exercise, my students sometimes get caught up on trying
to think of the “greatest” such moments. Don’t fall into this needless trap.
Instead think merely of one moment (presumably of many) of particularly strong
impact in any one category.
Tapping Your Emotional Triggers

The following are some additional prompts to key significant emotional moments—some in
the form of memories, and others in the form of statements that may have been said either by
you or to you—that can help enrich your characterizations.
First time as an adult you said, “I love you.”
A time you said, “I love you,” and wished you hadn’t.
A time you were struck, beaten, or defeated.
A time you struck, beat, or defeated someone else.
Best time you ever spent with a family member.
Best time you ever spent with a stranger.
“Please stop. I’m scared.”
“Don’t hurt me.”
“Give that to me.”
“I’m telling.”
“Do as you’re told.”
“I can’t believe I just said/did that.”
“I could kill you.”
“I’m not that kind of person.”
“You can’t ask me to do that.”
It’s important to be as specific as possible in fleshing out these scenes. The devil is in the
details, as they say. And in this instance, the devil is your friend.

Obviously plumbing your own life will not provide access to the whole of your
characters’ inner lives (unless your characters inhabit the same world you do).
Rather these moments provide touchstones, points of access to begin the
exploration into similar moments in your characters’ lives—a necessary but not
sufficient precondition for a compelling portrayal.
Each of these triggers a vulnerability or a secret, perhaps a desire, maybe
even a contradiction, depending on context. By envisioning these scenes in your
characters’ lives, after first exploring them in your own, you gain key insights
into the formative episodes in their emotional lives, and, with hope, begin to see
them more vividly in your mind’s eye, the better to render them on the page.
The key is to intuit the character so distinctly she seems capable of acting on
her own volition. Once this happens—and as I said at the outset, it’s a mystery
how or why it does—you’re capable of beginning the dialogue that will form

your story, asking your character: Where are you going? Why? How will you get
there? With whom? And who will you have become when the journey is over?
DAVID CORBETT (davidcorbett.com) is the author of four critically acclaimed novels, most
recently Do They Know I’m Running? His story “Pretty Little Parasite” was selected for Best
American Mystery Stories 2009.

Chapter 3

DEPICTING CONVINCING RELATIONSHIPS
BY ELIZABETH SIMS
The very first novel I, aged twenty-something, wrote, is unpublished and will
stay that way. An ensemble coming-of-age story of four teenagers, its
weaknesses are legion: tame story line, thin action, unimaginatively rendered
settings, hackneyed themes (though I will say the dialogue wasn’t bad). Having
now published seven novels, I look back on that manuscript and realize that
underlying the shortcomings I just mentioned lies its principal flaw: poor
character development. The kids just don’t pop.
So I’ve been pleased to read reviews of my latest novels (the Rita Farmer
mysteries) that praise the characterization—and I’ve been struck by the number
of them that cite the realism of my characters’ relationships. While plot is
important, good characters can make or break your book. And the best characters
are those who relate convincingly not just to their world, but to one another.
Let’s consider, to start, the categories of relationships we might write in our
fiction:
Romantic
Parent/Child
Siblings
Aggressor/Victim
Rivals/Adversaries
Best Friends
Boss/Employee
Caregiver/Receiver

Cop/Criminal
Partners (in business, crime, etc.)
Slave/Master
Human/Environment
Human/God
Human/Pet
Casual Acquaintances
… and so many more.
Everybody has relationships. In your fiction—as in life—you want to take those
connections beyond the obvious. Like descriptions, relationships can lapse into
cliché. Think of the hero and his wisecracking sidekick, the frustrated housewife
and the handsome neighbor, the befuddled father and his precocious child, the
renegade cop and the stupid chief.
When you create your characters, go ahead and give them meaty biceps or
thin shanks, blue eyes, hemophilia, courage, a ranch, neuroses, penchants for
vegetarianism or anarchy or Lawrence Welk or scuba. Do this until you know
who they are.
Then explore who they are beyond themselves.
Here’s how.

1. MAKE THEM STOP AND THINK
Introspection is the easiest and clearest way to develop your characters’
relationships. Make your characters think about their bonds; make them
challenge their own thoughts and feelings. I love him, but why? What’s the real
reason I hate her? What needs to happen so I can get over this?
Shakespeare was one of the first masters of introspection, via his soliloquies.
When Hamlet considers the pros and cons of avenging his father’s murder, you
think and feel right along with him. You ask yourself the same moral questions.
Your heart catches when he fails to take action, and it catches again when he

does act. The central issue to him is honor, and only in the context of alliances
can honor exist.
Today’s introspective scenes might not be as easily identifiable as those
soliloquies were, but they’ve evolved right along with storytelling styles over the
years. Take, for example, Michael Chabon’s novelette The Final Solution, which
merges the Holocaust with British-style crime busting through an elderly
Sherlock Holmes (though the character remains unnamed throughout the story).
In Sir Arthur Conan Doyle’s mysteries, the original Holmes never reveals
himself at all; we come to know him only through the eyes of Dr. Watson, the
first-person narrator. But in The Final Solution, Chabon affords himself
complete license to the great detective’s brain and heart simply by choosing the
third-person point of view. In his portrayal, we see that Holmes is a particularly
introspective hero, less self-assured than he used to be (though no less sharp),
beset by doubts and petty worries, struggling with old age and the tropes of
contemporary life. Most important, we see how hungry he is for human
connections: Will they like me? Will they understand me? Who am I against?
Who am I for? These questions motivate him as the story progresses.
So take a little time to tell your readers what your characters are thinking
about the others. Say you’re writing a story in which a son kills his abusive
father. What agonies would he go through, if the act were premeditated? And if
it weren’t, what hell would he experience afterward?
Instead of having the son stand next to a tree and tell it his troubles, you
might write something like this:
Roger Jr. fingered the five-dollar bill in his pocket and decided to buy the
breakfast burrito instead of two Hostess fruit pies, same price. As he paid the
zit-faced clerk, he wondered if he would meet his father in hell. If, after
tonight, a bus ran over him, Roger Jr., would he go to hell instantly or would
there be some kind of processing period? Would the pain of being dragged
under a bus be worse than waking up in hell? Do they drag people under

buses in hell? Would his father be the one to drive the bus, even? Drive the
bus around and around the lake of fire or whatever. Roger Sr. would rightly
go to hell for what he’d done—for what he’d done for so many years, over
and over—but maybe he could work his way out someday. After half of
infinity, maybe. Whereas Roger Jr. would stay in hell forever because he’d
be a murderer. “You’re still the dumbest one in the family,” his dad would
say in hell, one more time, crookedly, what with half of his face blown off.
Let’s at least be sure to blow off the full face tonight.

2. GIVE THEM STRONG OPINIONS
Some writers seem reluctant to give their characters strong opinions—maybe
because we don’t like to seem overbearing ourselves. True, being overbearing
may be a flaw, but in fiction, flaws are good. Give your characters flaws that can
be fatal. For my series protagonist Rita Farmer, it’s her tendency to lose her
temper. Her anger flares, and before you know it she’s doing something she’ll
regret. On the other hand, her anger can save her—if it comes up at just the right
time. And her fury has much to do with her opinions.
In the opening pages of Ernest Hemingway’s The Sun Also Rises, the
protagonist, Jake Barnes, does nothing but tell all about another character,
Robert Cohn, giving opinion after opinion. From the way Jake describes Robert
and his accomplishments, we learn some things about Robert, but we learn a lot
more about the way Jake thinks. He clearly despises Robert, yet we soon see that
the men are also friends, at least of a sort. We sense that they may become rivals.
Why? We want to keep reading to find out.
Much of the story’s power comes from the feelings the characters have for—
and against—one another. We identify with their love, and we’re appalled by
their callousness. We are also educated by it. This is how some people live. Is it
shallow, or perhaps deeper than it really seems? Desirable or undesirable? We
hold ourselves up to its mirror.

In your own work, remember that every narrator has a personality. Let that
narrator’s opinions inform her character. And by all means, let characters gossip
among themselves. An exchange as simple as this one between two teenagers
can paint a sharp little picture:
“Jeanette has zero self-respect,” said Wendy, shoving two skinny sixthgraders aside so she could be first in the cafeteria line.
“Yeah,” agreed Dani, crowding behind her, giving an extra shove to one
of the littler kids, then looking to Wendy for approval. Then, after a pause, “I
saw her making out with Tony after the game Friday.”
Wendy whipped around. “Why didn’t you tell me? He told me he went
home!”
It wasn’t true, but Dani did stuff like this over and over. She didn’t know
why, except that it felt good to get other people in trouble.

3. PLAY A GAME OF RISK
Make one character sacrifice or risk something for another. Countless spiritual
scriptures, myths, classics, and modern tales exploit the heart-clutching moment
of a character dying to save others, or for a cause. But equally compelling can be
a character merely risking his life for another.
In Margaret Mitchell’s Gone With the Wind, Scarlett O’Hara puts everything
at stake by remaining in Atlanta as Sherman’s army advances, in order to help
her sister-in-law Melanie Wilkes through a near-fatal childbirth. The day drags
on, it’s hot as hell, Melanie writhes in pain, the doctor is busy with thousands of
wounded soldiers, most everybody else has fled the city, and the Yankees are
coming. Scarlett doggedly mops the pain sweat from Melanie’s body as the fear
sweat from her own soaks her dress. Mitchell could have cut this scene without
really impacting her main plot, but instead she positively hammers us with it.
Why? Because it’s a test of Scarlett’s character.

Granted, Scarlett had promised Melanie’s husband, Ashley, to look after her
while he was away fighting. But at the risk of her own life? After all, Scarlett
wants Ashley for herself. How easy it would be to let Melanie and the unborn
baby, well, sort of die!
No. We need to know that Scarlett wouldn’t abandon Melanie even when her
own life is at stake, because we need to know that Scarlett isn’t merely a hard
bitch who gets what she wants. If that was all there was to her, she’d be fine as a
stereotype in a soap opera, but she wouldn’t be an immortal character. We would
not root for her in spite of her flaws.
Make one of your characters willing to die for another, and put him in
position where that could happen. Your readers will curse their alarm clocks in
the morning.

4. ADD A HYPOTENUSE
Make triangles. Did you notice something about the relationships I listed earlier?
They’re all dyads. Most relationships start out that way, but too often writers stay
stuck on dyadic relationships to the exclusion of more complex ones. Consider F.
Scott Fitzgerald’s The Great Gatsby. Gatsby’s relationship with Daisy is
memorable only because of the huge hulking reason they can’t be together:
Daisy’s husband, Tom Buchanan.
A lesser author than Fitzgerald might have skimmed over the character of
Tom. The very fact of his existence, plus the fact that Daisy took a vow to be
true to him, should be enough—and it would’ve been, for a dime novel of the
day. But it wasn’t enough for Fitzgerald. He enlarged the character of Tom by
giving him a relationship with the narrator, Nick Carraway. Old college
acquaintances, their relationship intensifies during the novel, and it’s through
Nick’s eyes that we see Tom’s strength, his selfishness, his cruelty and—in a
powerful moment when he tries to win Daisy’s heart back from Gatsby—his
tenderness.

Our emotions are not rational, and our relationships aren’t, either. This is
why romantic obsession is a terrifically handy tool for the writer (sexual
attraction being the great motivator of millions of bad decisions—and
sometimes, of course, of salvation, when it works out). Consider adding a sturdy
hypotenuse to your two main characters and see what happens. The third party
doesn’t even have to be human—it can be an animal, a career, an addiction, a
call to adventure, an obligation—anything that gets in the way of the cozy
pairing you began with.

5. LEVERAGE THE GROUP
As a writer, you’re a student of human nature. When I was a retail store manager
(prior life), I learned that the two games groups like to play the most are Ain’t It
Awful and Kill the Leader. People behave differently in groups than they do
otherwise, the most obvious and horrifying example being a mob, which is
capable of violence far beyond the natural inclination of most individuals
because the mob serves not merely as a shield, but as an excuse. The
relationships between individuals in a group—whether a clique of three or an
organization of thousands—are endlessly varied, shifting, and fascinating.
Three works that use group dynamics to gripping effect are the novels A
High Wind in Jamaica by Richard Hughes, The Help by Kathryn Stockett and
the play Glengarry Glen Ross by David Mamet. In the first, a group of children
fall into the clutches of pirates, and what follows between them serves to
illustrate that the veneer of civilization is thinner than most of us can bear to
admit. In the second, protagonists from both sides of the divide in segregated
Mississippi demonstrate that while groups can greatly influence individuals, the
right individual can exercise great power over a group.
And Mamet’s play reinforces all of those messages while giving us a
spectacle of testosterone-fueled ruthlessness, set in a Chicago real estate office.
Competition for money and success drives the men to cruelty, lying, and thieving
as one aligns himself against the other, pairs align against individuals, and the

group alternately pits itself against the boss, then casts itself in profane servility
to him.
One small, subtle moment (which was expanded in the film version of the
play) shows how even a passing reference to a relationship can deepen a
character’s motivation. Levene, a struggling salesman, is desperate to get better
customer leads, and in pleading with his boss, he finally says, “My daughter …”
and trails off.
That’s it. No manipulative words beyond that. Just the simple mention of a
relationship—a family obligation, the obligation of a father to a daughter, the
obligation perhaps freighted by some special, unnamed circumstance about the
daughter—helps the audience understand where Levene is coming from. He is
needy, and he isn’t above exploiting his own pain.
How can group dynamics deepen your characters? The key is to remember
that in a group, relationships and alliances are ever changing, depending on
circumstances. And we know circumstances never remain the same. Figure out
how the underdog might transform into a tyrant, or how a fun little secret can
become a public threat.

6. BEFRIEND AMBIGUITY
If we wish to write clearly, how can ambiguity be okay? I think Patricia
Highsmith is just about the best there is when it comes to harnessing ambiguity
in relationships. In her Edgar-winning novel The Talented Mr. Ripley, the
relationship between the two main characters is sexually nebulous, and the same
goes for her Strangers on a Train.
This was likely due in part to the mores of the time (both were published in
the 1950s), but this strangely explicated ambiguity works well to make things
feel unsettled, ulterior. Tom Ripley murders Dickie Greenleaf out of a twisted
sense of possession, if not love. This is so much more compelling than if Tom
had merely murdered Dickie for personal gain, a shallow friendship their only
connection.

In your own work, resist the urge to overexplain relationships. Everybody
instinctively understands there’s more than meets the eye. In every adult, there’s
a bit of a child. In every cop, there’s a bit of a criminal. In every sadist, there’s a
bit of a masochist. And in every human, there’s a bit of a beast—and a bit of a
god. Use that knowledge to your advantage.

7. TAP INTO THE POWER OF A GRUDGE
Mythology and folklore are chock-full of motivational grudges, as is life. All of
us have probably clung to a grudge against somebody for a while, fantasizing
various retribution scenarios, but what kind of personality acts on such an
impulse to the point of destructive vengeance? The sort we know too well from
true-crime books and America’s Most Wanted–type TV: a person whose selfesteem is lower than whale crap, but whose ego is as big as Kilauea. Grudgeholding characters have fueled a diverse range of popular tales, from Edgar
Allan Poe’s “The Cask of Amontillado” to Dan Brown’s The Da Vinci Code.
Consider Stephen King’s Carrie. King downplays the quality of this, his first
novel, but it continues to fascinate and terrify readers. Teenaged Carrie is taunted
by her classmates for being odd, dominated as she is by her warped, religiousnut mother. The other kids push her to the limit, not knowing she’s developed
telekinetic powers.
The story works so well because Carrie’s eventual murderous rage is
believable. And it’s believable because in devising ways for Carrie’s
schoolmates to torment her, King put her into situations of intolerable shame and
degradation, culminating in the pig’s-blood drenching at the prom. You read that
and even though you’re basically a mild-mannered person, you find yourself
whispering, “Kill them, Carrie—kill all those bastards!”
Your readers are going to expect any grudge you create for your characters to
be that powerful. So do what King did: Create a character with a sensitive spirit
and make him suffer injustices that would make anyone’s stomach shrivel.
Then sit back and enjoy the fun.

8. DON’T OVERLOOK EVERYDAY INTERACTIONS
If you own a car and are at all like me, you can drive for hundreds of miles
without reacting to the other idiots in their cars. Somebody cuts you off and you
shrug or even smile indulgently. But then, one day, something is different inside
you. Somebody zooms too close and your anger surges beyond all reason. You
want to run him down and flatten him into the pavement. You want to bump his
vehicle off a cliff. You want him to pay.
You don’t even know his name.
Yes, a chance encounter with a stranger can be powerful enough to transform
a moment, or a day, even to change your life. Just think what you can do in your
fiction, with a little planning and imagination.
Similarly, acquaintanceships can bolster your characterizations. An
acquaintanceship can serve to illustrate a character trait, or it can foment
enormous change in a whole cast of characters. Good examples are found in Jim
Thompson’s noir novel The Grifters. In the first pages, the character Roy Dillon
chisels some money out of a shopkeeper, a stranger. But the shopkeeper catches
on and beats him up, setting off an entire chain of events surrounding Roy’s
recovery.
Let your characters approach others, glance off them, then continue on
different trajectories. After all, this is what happens in real life. It’s all in the
relationships.
When crafting your characters’ relationships, let the yin-yang symbol be your
guide. You’ve seen this circle made of equal parts black and white, with a drop
of each color in the other. No relationships are clear-cut, nor are any one-sided.
Leaven the love with a little fear, or maybe even hate.
If you spend some time thinking about relationships in this way, you’ll see
opportunities to develop your characters further than you ever imagined.
Because characters are people, just like us. Relationships reveal the various roles

we play, the ever-changing masks we all wear, and the yearnings that expose our
hearts.
ELIZABETH SIMS (elizabethsims.com) is a contributing editor for Writer’s Digest Magazine.
She’s the award-winning author of seven novels and many short stories, poems, and articles.

Chapter 4

CREATE THE (IM)PERFECT HEROIC COUPLE
BY LEIGH MICHAELS
Romantic heroes and heroines are a bit different from the sort of people we run
into every day. These main characters have their flaws, but overall they’re just a
little nicer, just a little brighter, just a little quicker, just a little better than real
people. They’re allowed their petty moments, but in important matters they take
the moral high ground.
Of course, standards vary by category and type of story. The hero of a
mainstream stand-alone novel can get by with things the hero of a sweet,
traditional category romance wouldn’t dream of doing. But even the bad-boy
hero will have good aspects to his character, and the reader won’t have to dig too
deeply to find them. The chick-lit heroine may have some rough edges, but deep
down she’s not the sort to be cruel, even to people who deserve it.
How exactly do you go about uniting your hero and heroine? When creating
the perfect romantic couple, consider the following.

1. USE IMPERFECTIONS TO SHOW DEPTH
To be real, your characters have to be imperfect. They must have problems, or no
one will be interested in reading about them. But while heroes and heroines have
almost certainly created some of their own problems, they haven’t done so out of
stupidity or short-sightedness, or the reader will have trouble empathizing. There
is usually a good motive—sometimes even a noble one—for the action that leads
them into trouble.
The problems the characters face are important to them—life-changing, in
fact—but must also be important to the reader. A story about whether Susie can

get Joe to improve his table manners isn’t likely to keep the reader on the edge
of her chair.
Main characters should grow and change during the course of a story. Since
they are facing life-altering problems and situations, it makes sense that these
difficulties will change their perspectives, attitudes, and outlooks on life.
The too-perfect character has no room to grow and mature as he deals with
the problems he’s going to face. But even in their imperfection, main characters
have to remain likeable, even admirable, in order to be worthy of a story.

2. STEER CLEAR OF MEAN
Heroes and heroines are unfailingly kind to those who are less powerful than
they are.
They are gentle; even if Aunt Agnes incessantly talks about her health, they
don’t snap at her or treat her like a nuisance. Heroes and heroines don’t kick the
dog no matter how angry they are. And every last one of them has an honorary
degree in how to get along with a kid while raising him to be a genius.
Heroes and heroines don’t gossip, and they don’t generally take delight in the
troubles of others, even when it’s the Other Woman and she deserves it.
They’re rude only to each other, and even then, they’re not hateful or vicious.
Wisecracks and smart remarks are acceptable; cruel taunts are another thing
entirely.
Heroes and heroines don’t lie, but they are allowed to be tight-fisted with the
truth. The hero, in particular, can be deliberately misleading if his motive in not
telling all the facts is to protect the heroine.

3. AVOID ADULTERY
Heroes and heroines don’t commit adultery. They may get divorced, but they do
not enter into a new relationship while there is still a legal or moral commitment
to a previous partner.

This restriction is largely a matter of common sense. If a person has so little
respect for a spouse that he has an affair—whether it’s physical or emotional—
then it’s difficult to believe that he would be any more faithful to the new love.
To a lesser degree, the same rule applies to other emotional commitments. A
heroine who is engaged is most likeable if the engagement is broken off as soon
as she recognizes the attraction to the new partner.
Whether the previous relationship was ended by a divorce, a broken
engagement, a jilting, or a partner’s death, the character does not enter a new
relationship until there has been adequate time to heal. Rebound relationships
often don’t last in real life, and they’re not convincing in fiction.
The length of time needed to recover will depend on the nature of the
relationship. It will take much longer to grieve the death of a partner in a solid
marriage than it will to get over a steady date who suddenly decided he wanted
to see other women.

4. BALANCE THE RELATIONSHIP
Main characters who are similar in style, in the amount of power they have over
their situation, and in their degree of outspokenness create a nice balance in the
structure of the romance. That doesn’t mean they should act the same, or that
they must be equal in every way—just that they should both have areas and
times where they’re stronger.
If the hero has the heroine completely under his thumb, where she’s helpless
to act or to put him in his place, then he may look more sadistic than heroic.
Pairing a heroine who’s an in-your-face screamer with a hero who’s the silent
type may make the heroine look like a verbal abuser. A hero who makes
patronizing remarks about a heroine who simply absorbs the insults is annoying,
but if she’s able to talk back to him in the same sort of way, they’re in
proportion. (They may both be annoying in that case, but at least the reader can
be equally annoyed.)

If one of your characters has a great deal of power over the other, look for
ways to even up the competition. The romance is far more satisfying when the
power between the characters is like a teeter-totter—sometimes she’s on the high
end, sometimes he is, but the reader doesn’t know from minute to minute who’s
going to have the upper hand.
LEIGH MICHAELS is the author of nearly one hundred books, including eighty contemporary
novels, three historical romance novels, and more than a dozen non-fiction books, including On
Writing Romance.

Developing Your Hero and Heroine
Answer the following questions for each of your main characters. It’s usually most productive
to take one character at a time, but if you run into difficulty answering the questions about
one, try switching over to the other for a while.
As you answer the questions, look for points of agreement and disagreement between
the characters. For instance, if he’s from a big family and she’s from a small one, how might
that create problems?
What is this character’s name?
What is her age and birth date?
What does she look like?
What is her astrological sign? Does it matter to her?
What are her parents like?
Does she have brothers and sisters?
How important are her family relationships?
Where does she live? (Urban? Small town? Rural?)
Why did she choose to live there?
Does she live in an apartment? House? What type or style? Did she choose the
residence, and why?
Does she live by herself? With others?
What are her important material possessions?
What are her hobbies?
What is her education?
What is her job? How does she feel about her work?
Is this a long-term career or just a job?
What does she want to be doing in twenty years?
If she has unexpected free time, what does she do?
How does she feel about the opposite sex?

What is her relationship status? Single? Divorced?
Does she have children?
Who is her best friend? Why?
Who is her worst enemy? Why?
How would a former date describe her?
What one event has made her who she is today?
How does that turning point in the character’s life relate to the other main character
in the story?
What trait does she have that she wants to keep secret from the world?
What does she like most about her life?
What does she dislike most about her life?
What would this character die to defend?
What are her most likable and unlikable traits?
As the story begins, what is her main problem?
What does she do that makes this problem worse?
Who is this person’s love interest?
What qualities in the other main character are most attractive to this person?
What is her ideal happy ending?
What reaction do you want readers to have to her?
Why should the reader care about her?
Now that you know this information, you might be tempted to work it all into your story. But
just because you know something about a character doesn’t mean your readers need to
know it. Select only those facts that best illustrate the person—the ones that have a strong
impact upon the story—to share with readers, and leave the rest out.

Chapter 5

CHOOSING YOUR CHARACTER’S PROFESSION
BY MICHAEL J. VAUGHN
Here’s the situation: You’re at a party. You’ve just met someone. Names are
exchanged—and then you face the daunting task of beginning a conversation.
What are the next words out of your mouth?
“So … what do you do?”
Why is this? Simple—a person’s job provides a readily accessible,
noninvasive point of inquiry that’s rife with conversational possibilities. Just one
tidbit can inspire common ground, follow-up questions, insights on character,
avenues to humor and possibly even free advice.
Just as employment is such a big part of our lives, it’s a big part of your
characters’ lives, as well. Even when career factors are far from the main thrust
of your narrative, carefully choosing and researching occupations for your
fictional heroes opens up a wealth of possibilities for enriching a story. Let’s
examine how some of today’s best authors have done just that.

FRAMING THE POINT OF VIEW
In David Guterson’s novel East of the Mountains, elderly widower Ben Givens
discovers that he’s dying of colon cancer. His reaction to this news is largely
determined by the important fact that Givens is a retired heart surgeon:
Like all physicians, he knew the truth of such a verdict; he knew full well the
force of cancer and how inexorably it operated. He grasped that nothing
could stop his death, no matter how hopeful he allowed himself to feel, no

matter how deluded … Better to end his life swiftly, cleanly, and to accept
that there would be no thwarting the onslaught of the disease.
By making his protagonist a doctor, Guterson sets up the philosophical
framework for his hero’s quest: finding the best way to die. He also provides the
opportunity for Givens to keep the disease a secret and, thereby, make his suicide
look like an accident.

MAKING THE STORY WORK
In his short-story collection Working Men, Michael Dorris uses work not just as
a point of reference, but often as the central conflict, as well. In the story
“Jeopardy,” drug salesman Don Banta’s main task—obtaining physician
signatures acknowledging their conversations—means that he spends most of his
waking hours chitchatting medical receptionists. During one conversation, he
talks to Dee Dee, whose son suffers from allergies:
Lots of pollen around, huh? Hey, maybe your little boy … That’s not him in
the frame on your desk? I can’t believe how he’s grown. No … Maybe he
could try this new inhaler. It’s a miracle worker. Just remember, you don’t
know where you got it, right, because I could get in major trouble and it’s
just because we’re friends, you know, and I had allergies myself as a kid.
Banta’s pathetic life is brought to a devastating nadir when he learns that his
father has died. Stuck in a motel room with no one to talk to, he calls Dee Dee—
and learns that the inhaler he used to bribe his way into her office has saved her
son from a near-fatal allergy attack.

ESTABLISHING CHARACTER
In Anne Tyler’s novel The Accidental Tourist, Macon Leary, while trying to get
over a divorce and his son’s murder, also has to deal with his dog’s new habit of
biting people. Although dog trainer Muriel Pritchett appears in the story in a

space usually reserved for a love interest, her loony verbal flights hardly seem a
match for Macon, a fragile, phobic intellectual. But Muriel trains Macon’s dog
with a fierce competence and tells some amazing stories—like the day she was
knocked down by a Doberman Pinscher:
Come to find him standing over me, showing all his teeth. Well, I thought of
what they said at Doggie, Do: Only one of you can be boss. So I tell him,
‘Absolutely not.’ … and my right arm is broken so I hold out my left, hold
out my palm and stare into his eyes—they can’t stand for you to meet their
eyes—and get to my feet real slow. And durned if that dog doesn’t settle
right back on his haunches.

PAINTING A CANVAS
In The Shipping News by Annie Proulx, Quoyle returns to his ancestral home in
Newfoundland and gets a job at the local newspaper covering the harbor beat.
Giving Quoyle this particular assignment allows Proulx to tap into the town’s
raison d’être, as well as the delicious patois of the seagoing trade, like this
passage from a local boat builder:
There’s the backbone of your boat, she’s scarfed now. You glance at that,
somebody who knows boats, you can see the whole thing right there. But
there’s nobody can tell ’ow she’ll fit the water, handle in the swells and lops
until you try ’er out. Except poor old Uncle Les, Les Budgel. Dead now …
Built beautiful skiffs and dories, butter on a ’ot stove.
Proulx adds to this canvas by heading her chapters with diagrams and
descriptions of sailors’ knots.
The secret to all four of these passages is their authentic feel—as if the
author himself has performed this line of work. While it’s possible for writers to
capture some details of a vocation through reading, firsthand experience and
real-life sources are your best bet.

The following are some strategies that have worked for me.

USING WHAT DO YOU DO?
Sad to say, if you’re writing fiction, you’ve probably got a day job. Why not use
it? And don’t discount the nonglamorous. A lot of your readers will have much
more in common with a shipping clerk than a shipping magnate.
When I had a job soldering copper pipes for my contractor brother-in-law, I
began to notice the small, poetic details of working there: the horizontal ballet of
positioning the torch, the way the lead solder flashed around the joint as it
melted, the pleasing hiss when I ran a damp rag over the hot pipe. I decided to
give this same assignment to the poet-protagonist of my novel Rhyming
Pittsburgh, hoping to complicate the effete intellectual stereotype with a healthy
dose of blue-collar grit.

UPGRADING A HOBBY
Lots of hobbies are simply professions performed on an amateur level. Easy
enough, then, to take the knowledge attained as a hobbyist and crank it up to the
level of a fictional pro.
In the 1990s, I played drums for several bands. Although I never got to the
professional level, I met a lot of pros, played a few clubs and got a good allaround feel for the musician’s life. I’ve since had two drummer protagonists,
made plentiful use of backstage stories and even filled out the details with
specific musical passages from my playing days.

BEING A JOURNALIST
Ask questions. Be a buttinsky. People love to talk about their jobs—especially if
you tell them you’re working on a novel.
For my opera novel Gabriella’s Voice, I set up an extensive research program
to learn more about the profession of my singer-protagonist. I got an assignment
reviewing the San Francisco Opera. I took a soprano friend out to dinner, parked

a tape recorder next to her silverware, and asked three hours’ worth of questions.
Then I spent a full season with her company—hanging out at auditions,
rehearsals, and cast parties. This was the best way to pick up great backstage
stories.
The reviews I most enjoy from Gabriella come from singers who spent half
the book laughing at inside jokes and inevitably come back to me with that
priceless question, “How did you know all that?”

VALUING EXPERIENTIAL VENTURES
A playwright friend of mine used to say, “You gotta live before you can write.”
Though it’s smart to use your character’s occupation as an excuse to dig up
firsthand experiences, the reverse is also true: You can pursue these kinds of
adventures at all times, with the idea that someday later you’ll use them in your
writing.
It’s not just a good way to approach fiction. It’s a good way to approach life.
MICHAEL J. VAUGHN is the author of twelve novels, most recently Billy Saddle, inspired by the
story of Chicago Cubs fan Steve Bartman. He is also an active poet, with more than one hundred
poems published in journals.

Chapter 6

THREE TECHNIQUES FOR CRAFTING YOUR VILLAIN
BY HALLIE EPHRON
Today’s villain is no Snidely Whiplash standing there twirling his moustache and
sneering, a neon arrow blinking “BAD GUY” over his head. In a good
contemporary mystery—and in a lot of other genres besides—any character who
looks that nefarious is going to turn out to be innocent.
Readers are delighted when the bad guy turns out to have been hiding in
plain sight, an innocuous-looking character who cleverly conceals his true self,
luring trusting victims and then snaring them in a death trap. “The butler did it”
won’t wash in a modern mystery. Minor characters who are part of the wallpaper
for the first twenty-eight chapters can’t be promoted to villain status at the end
just to surprise the reader. And you can’t give a character a personality transplant
in the final chapter. Disbelief will trump surprise unless you’ve left subtle clues
along the way.

TAKE THE TIME TO PLAN AHEAD
Some writers know right from the get-go which character is guilty. They start
with the completed puzzle and work their way backward, shaping the story
pieces and fitting them together. Others happily write without knowing whodunit
until the scene when the villain is actually unmasked. Then they rewrite,
cleaning up the trail of red herrings and establishing the clues that make the
solution work.
Which way is better? That’s a question only you can answer. I personally
need a plan. I have a friend, a many-times-published mystery writer, who boasts
that she never plans. The identity of the villain comes as a complete surprise to

her and the reader. In the next breath, she says she ended up having to dump the
first two hundred pages from the draft of her latest novel. Thus having a plan up
front can save a whole lot of rewriting in what should be the homestretch.

CREATE A VILLAIN WORTH PURSUING
You can’t just throw all your suspects’ names into a bowl and pick one to be
your villain. For your novel to work, the villain must be special. Your sleuth
deserves a worthy adversary—a smart, wily, dangerous creature who tests your
protagonist’s courage and prowess. Stupid, bumbling characters are good for
comic relief, but they make lousy villains. The smarter, more invincible the
villain, the harder your protagonist must work to find his vulnerability and the
greater the achievement in bringing him to justice.
Must the villain be loathsome? Not at all. He can be chilling but charming,
like Hannibal Lecter. Thoroughly evil? It’s better when the reader can muster a
little sympathy for a complex, realistic character who feels her crimes are
justified.
So, in planning, try to wrap your arms around why your villain does what he
does. What motivates him to kill? Consider the standard motives like greed,
jealousy, or hatred. Then go a step further. Get inside your villain’s head and see
the crime from his perspective. What looks to law enforcement like a murder
motivated by greed may, to the perpetrator, be an act in the service of a noble,
even heroic cause.
Here’s how a villain might justify a crime:
Righting a prior wrong
Revenge (the victim deserved to die)
Vigilante justice (the justice system didn’t work)
Protecting a loved one
Restoring order to the world.

Finally, think about what happened to make that character the way she is. Was
she born bad, or did she turn sour as a result of some early experience? If your
villain has a grudge against society, why? If she can’t tolerate being jilted, why?
You may never share your villain’s life story with your reader, but to make a
complex, interesting villain, you need to know.
By understanding how the villain justifies the crimes to himself, and what
events in his life triggered these crimes, you give yourself the material you need
to get past a black-hatted caricature and paint your villain in shades of gray.
Inventing Your Villain
1. Reread a favorite mystery novel or read Scott Turow’s Presumed Innocent or Linda
Barnes’ Deep Pockets. Pay special attention to the villain. Think about how the
author creates a bad guy who is somewhat sympathetic and three-dimensional. As
you read, see how quickly you can spot the villain’s motive(s), and pay special
attention to the pace at which the author reveals important details about the villain.
Also look for how the villain rationalizes his actions throughout the story.
2. Brainstorm your villain and jot down your ideas: family background, physical
appearance, education, formative events, biggest heartbreak, greatest success,
and so on. This quick character sketch will change and grow as your villain comes
to life.
3. Now that you have a more detailed understanding of your villain, pick a modus
operandi that matches up with your bad guy. Factor in your villain’s capabilities,
expertise, motivation, and personal rage factor.

MAKE THE CRIME FIT THE VILLAIN
There are many ways to kill off a character. You can have him shot, stabbed,
poisoned, or pushed off a cliff. You can have him run over by a car or bashed in
the head with a fireplace poker. You get the picture.
The first issue to consider is: Would your villain have the expertise and
capability to commit this particular crime you’ve conceived for him?
Here’s an example: Suppose there’s a novel about a surgeon who, up to page
302, has been the soul of buttoned-down respectability. Suddenly, on page 303,

he leaps from a hospital laundry bin and mows down his rival for hospital
director with machine-gun fire. Never mind that up to this point in the novel the
guy has done nothing more than attend board meetings, get drunk and obnoxious
at a cocktail party, and perform heart surgery. Now suddenly he’s The
Terminator? The behavior doesn’t fit the character. If he stabbed, poisoned, or
pushed his rival off the hospital roof, the reader might swallow it. The author
might get away (barely) with the shooting if hints were dropped earlier that this
surgeon once served in military special forces.
Choose a modus operandi that your villain (and all your suspects) might
plausibly adopt, and establish that your villain has the capability and expertise
required. A murder by strangling, stabbing, or beating is more plausible if your
villain is strong and has a history of physical violence. If your villain plants an
electronically activated plastic explosive device, be prepared to show how he
learned to make a sophisticated bomb and how he got access to the components.
If a woman shoots her husband with a .45 automatic, be prepared to show how
she learned to use firearms and that she’s strong enough to handle the recoil of a
.45.
The second issue to consider: Is the rage factor appropriate for the
character’s motivation? The more extreme the violence, the more likely the
crime is to be fueled by hatred and rage. A robber shoots a victim once; an
enraged husband pumps bullets into the man who raped his wife until the
ammunition runs out. A villain may administer a quick-working deadly poison to
a victim he wants out of the way, but a villain who loathes his victim might pick
a poison that’s slow and painful—and hang around to watch.
Adjust the violence quotient to match the amount of rage your villain has
toward her victim.
HALLIE EPHRON is the author of more that ten books including Writing and Selling Your Mystery
Novel: How to Knock ’Em Dead With Style.

Imagining the Crime
How would your villain kill his victim? Consider your villain’s motive, strength, and expertise;
consider the rage factor. Remember that the method should fit your villain’s personality;
otherwise it won’t seem authentic to readers. Check the ones that could fit:
Asphyxiate by smoke inhalation
Beat to death
Bludgeon
Bury alive
Drown
Hang
Mow down with machine-gun fire
Poison: drug overdose
Poison: mushrooms
Push in front of a train
Run down with a car
Run over with heavy equipment
Shoot with a pistol
Slit throat
Smother
Stab multiple times
Stab once
Strangle

Chapter 7

CREATE VICIOUS VILLAINS
BY CHARLES ATKINS
It’s such a disappointment to sit down with a scary novel or crime story, only to
find that the killer has been portrayed one-dimensionally. Suddenly the reader
finds himself rolling his eyes in annoyance instead of being struck with fear.
Readers want their characters—villains or not—to be realistic and multifaceted.
They want to know why a character acts the way he does, and they want it to
make sense.
As a psychiatrist and author of thrillers myself, I (like many authors) have
turned to specific personality disorders to flesh out a character’s motivation
behind criminal behavior. Most readers are familiar, for instance, with multiple
personality disorder (which tends to translate to one personality being good,
while the other is a crazed serial killer). Realistically, though, multiple
personality disorder doesn’t figure into many real-life crimes and, therefore, it
would be implausible in fiction. Not only that, but not all criminals fit this mold.
Here’s a whirlwind review of the dark side of human nature, so you can craft
believable villains and direct your reader into the mind of a madman.

NARCISSISM
Narcissism is named after the Greek god Narcissus, who fell in love with his
own reflection and died pining for a love he could never have. The narcissist is a
legend in his own mind; he thinks the world revolves around him. When things
go well, he’s highly productive and creative. Many politicians, artists,
physicians, lawyers, and corporate leaders have a healthy dose of narcissism.
Narcissists are self-aware; they understand themselves. In moderation, self-love

and admiration aren’t necessarily bad qualities; they’re what give people the
confidence needed to take risks. But a narcissist doesn’t take criticism or
rejection well. When opposed or slighted, she becomes frustrated, angry,
sarcastic, even vengeful. She might steam over an insult and, if the opportunity
presents itself, retaliate. If she’s highly intelligent, her vengeance could be
exacted in an unexpected manner, and no one will ever be able to pin the blame.
When confronted, the narcissist will lie and deny any guilt or wrongdoing,
and this is where things can turn ugly—even deadly. Think about politicians
who’ve been confronted with sexual indiscretion: They deny the whole thing,
even though everyone knows all will be revealed in the end. Narcissists are
natural choices for villains in novels about revenge. One famous example is Sir
Arthur Conan Doyle’s Professor Moriarty, whose driving motivation was to
outwit and destroy his nemesis, Sherlock Holmes.
In my novel The Cadaver’s Ball, villain Ed Tyson is a brilliant and highly
narcissistic researcher who may well win the Nobel Prize. But the woman he
loves rejects him for another man and is killed in a suspicious accident. When
she dies, Ed fixates on the man who “stole” her from him and is out for coldblooded revenge. Unlike the sociopath who feels no remorse, Ed has his own
moral code. The wrong that was done to him, and to the woman he loved, must
be corrected. If this involves the death of his rival, so be it.
A variant of the narcissist is the malignant narcissist. In addition to the
previous qualities, there’s an element of sadism—a taking of pleasure from
another’s pain. The malignant narcissist gets ahead by stomping everyone
beneath him. Examples include the bullying sheriff, characters who ruthlessly
climb the corporate ladder, and abusive spouses who maintain control through a
mixture of oppression and brutality. Part of what makes malignant narcissists get
ahead is that while they terrorize their subordinates, they kiss up to their
superiors—and they do so in convincing fashion. They’re wonderful yes-men to
the boss, whom they secretly despise, because in their hearts they know they
could do a far better job.

THE ANTISOCIAL PERSONALITY
Antisocial personality disorder (aka sociopathy) is a small hop, skip, and jump
from the malignant narcissist. And this is where we find the mother lode of
serious criminal behavior.
From an early age, children who become sociopaths exhibit warning signs.
In my second novel, Risk Factor, I used several characters to show how the
moral development of such a child becomes warped and distorted. This typically
happens through a series of losses, traumas, and separations in the child’s early
life (abuse, divorce, frequent moves, etc.). Just as learning to talk and walk are
important developmental milestones, learning to develop empathy also happens
at a young age. If this stage is missed or seriously disrupted, a child grows to
adulthood with no real concern for the well-being of others; this is the core
defect in sociopaths.
Sociopaths believe they’re free from the rules of society, and as such, they
should be able to have what they want, when they want it, and you’d best not get
in their way. Fiction (and real-life prisons) are filled with sociopaths, from
Bonnie and Clyde to white-collar criminals who’ve plundered the retirement
plans of their employees. The only time you see repentance from a sociopath is
when he’s caught, and the remorse isn’t for the victims, it’s for himself.
Sociopaths are well suited for a life of crime, as they lack the internal moral
workings that lead to feelings of guilt and empathy. Because of this, they stay
calm when engaged in high-risk criminal behaviors. Studies looking at heart
rate, blood pressure, and other physiological indicators of stress have shown that
sociopaths aren’t easily flustered—a phenomenon referred to as “low arousal.”
This may also account for how sociopaths can often “trick” polygraph tests.
In Risk Factor, my villain is both sociopathic and narcissistic, a common
mixture. What gives him added punch is his intelligence and ability to conceal
his inner nastiness. The combination of sociopathy, high IQ and self-awareness
is what creates mastermind criminals. These are the most successful sociopaths,

as they know how to keep their criminal activities and lack of empathy well
hidden. Some sociopaths, like John Wayne Gacy, who tortured, killed, and then
buried victims in the crawl space of his house, wear the mantel of respectability.
This is the killer next door—the one who leaves the neighbors stunned and
commenting, “He seemed like such a nice guy.”

THE BORDERLINE PERSONALITY
Unlike sociopathy, which has a definite male preponderance, borderline
personality disorder affects far more women than men. Some speculate that
borderline personality disorder is the female equivalent of sociopathy. In this
case, instead of acting out in violent ways, the person directs the violence
internally. The precipitants of the disorder are similar to what we see in
sociopathy but with a high incidence of sexual abuse.
People with borderline personality disorder have chaotic lives that spin out
of control in the setting of real—or imagined—rejection and abandonment.
Someone with this disorder will overdose or engage in other risky behaviors to
try to hold on to people in her life. “If you leave me, I’ll kill myself,” is a typical
strategy for this group, as opposed to the malignant narcissist or sociopath, who
might say, “If you leave me, I’ll kill you.”
The borderline views her world in a black-and-white way. People are either
good or bad. Her boss either loves her or is an evil bitch who’s out to get her.
Borderlines struggle with ambiguity and can’t grasp the notion that people are a
mixture of qualities. These people are prone to substance abuse, self-mutilation
(cutting with razor blades, burning with cigarettes), eating disorders, and brief
periods of psychosis, where they lose touch with reality. Some people with
borderline personality disorder will dissociate, a condition mostly linked to
multiple personality disorder (aka dissociative identity disorder).
From a literary perspective, borderlines make fantastic catalysts for action
because they’re ruled by their emotions; they’re not given over to contemplation.
They act first and think later, and they have a rare talent for making a bad

situation worse. In The Cadaver’s Ball, we meet Ann, a beautiful borderline
medical student who’s just attempted suicide. From there, she seduces, boozes,
and blackmails her way to an unhappy end.

THE PARANOID PERSONALITY
Paranoia is the unrealistic belief that people are out to get you. And because of
this, it’s not surprising that people with this condition can turn violent: In their
minds, they’re acting in self-defense. People with paranoid personality disorder
view everything and everyone with suspicion. They can misread a friendly smile
as a covert sign that they’re about to get fired. An offhand comment or minor
criticism can lead to days of obsessing over the hidden meaning and underlying
motivation.
The paranoid, unlike the introspective narcissist, doesn’t know he’s paranoid.
To him, the rest of the world has a problem. He can’t understand why people
conspire against him, and this makes him angry.
Those with paranoia often lead solitary lives and take jobs where they can be
left alone. When a paranoid person turns violent, the anger is most often directed
toward the perceived persecutor. People who spin elaborate delusional fantasies
about the government are classic examples. A couple of important variants of
paranoia include:
shared paranoia, as with some religious and political cults
drug-induced paranoia, which is common with cocaine and stimulant abuse;
it’s also standard with cannabis use, although it’s less likely to be associated
with violent behavior
paranoid jealousy, where there’s a fixed false belief that a beloved is
cheating on you. Shakespeare nailed this one when he had Othello smother
the virtuous Desdemona.
The truth about personality types—of which there are far more than I’ve outlined
here—is that we all have bits and pieces of different ones. Where a character

trait crosses over into something diagnosable, or potentially dangerous, is the
terrain that fascinates us. Readers want to know why a twelve-year-old shows up
to school with murder on his mind and what made that long-term employee
shoot his boss. Understanding these killer personalities gives readers the leg up
they need. When such personalities are fully fleshed out in fiction or true-crime
writing, we catch a glimpse into the darker side of human nature and are able to
understand the mind of the killer living next door.
CHARLES ATKINS (charlesatkins.com) is a board-certified psychiatrist and a member of the Yale
Clinical Faculty.

Focus on the Writing Life:
FEEDING YOUR CREATIVITY

CREATIVE LOLLYGAGGING:
WORK HARDER AT WORKING LESS
BY MICHAEL J. VAUGHN
Every writer knows you can’t sit down in front of a notebook or computer screen
and wait for ideas to simply show up. You’d better have some ideas before you
sit down, and you’d better figure out a system for harvesting those ideas.
Ironically—and happily—one of the best ways to achieve this is to do …
nothing. Well, not nothing, exactly. Think of it as “creative lollygagging.”
Picture yourself as a satellite dish. The way a dish receives signals is a decidedly
passive activity, but nothing comes in until the equipment is properly charged
and opened to the universe. A few years ago, ensconced in one of my “brewing”
modes—done with my last novel, waiting for the next to come a-knockin’—I
decided to take my dish to the beach and open ’er up.
About a half mile into my walk, I noticed a friendly spark among the small
rocks and found bits of frosted glass—triangular shards worn to a gem like
smoothness by sand and waves. I remembered the fascination I felt as a child—
that nature could take a piece of man-made litter and make it so beautiful. I
walked a little farther, discovered another smattering and had the following
thought: What if someone became so obsessed with frosted glass that he decided
to make it his life’s work? I didn’t know it yet, but the satellite dish had just
taken in an entire novel.

But not just that: It also took in the process for imagining a novel. In the
following months, as I continued my beach hikes in search of frosted glass (if
my character was obsessed, I had to be obsessed), I discovered an intriguing
pattern. I arrived at the beach between chapters (my characters dangling in
midair, awaiting their instructions); I left with pocketfuls of glass and my next
chapter, nicely mapped out in my head.
If you subtly stimulate your other senses—in this case, tactile (the glass) and
auditory (the ocean)—you can take the “edge” away from your conscious,
purposive mind, return the satellite dish to a state of active passivity and open
yourself to the forces of serendipity. And if you come to the beach for frosted
glass, you’ll also get ideas for your story, slipping in along your peripheral
vision.

A CREATIVE LOLLYGAGGERS TO-DO LIST
The key to successful lollygagging is to do it creatively.
So what makes lollygagging creative lollygagging? Let’s look at the basic
elements. First, consider activity. We are not talking about sitting around on a
couch. Just as a satellite dish needs electricity, you need some blood pumping
into that brain. Next, consider low focus. The activity shouldn’t be so intense
that you don’t have time to think (Grand Prix and ice hockey are out). Look for a
mellow pursuit, surrounded by low-level distractions.
Finally, consider separation. If you don’t hie thee away from the computer,
the television, the bills, and the kids, you’re headed for a mighty wall o’ brain
lock. Following are some specific types of creative lollygagging to try:
Mobile (because it’s difficult to preoccupy a moving target): biking, hiking,
kayaking, rollerblading, a long road or train trip
Idle: fly-fishing, horseshoe tossing, kite flying, a solo game of eight ball, a
solo game of bowling, a session at the batting cage or driving range

Boring jobs (for those who simply must be productive): paint the garage,
rake the leaves, wash the windows, clean out the roof gutters, mow the lawn
Dilettantism (effective only if you try something for which you have
absolutely no talent): abstract painting, making up tunes on the piano,
creating monsters from modeling clay, inventing a ballet to your favorite
symphony, pounding on a conga drum.

THE COFFEEHOUSE RITUAL
If you’d like to take this one step further, try incorporating your lollygagging
directly into your writing ritual.
The Coffeehouse Ritual is a routine I’ve followed for fifteen years, with
excellent results (in fact, I used it to write this story).
1. Pick your place: Locate a coffeehouse that’s a mile or two from your home
(ideally, a thirty-to forty-five-minute walk).
2. The walk up: Head off at an easy pace (no power walking, please) and let
your thoughts drift. For the first few blocks, you’ll likely be occupied by
small matters of the day. Don’t worry—this is a necessary step, one that
will clear out your mind for the work ahead. As you pass the halfway point,
your thoughts should turn naturally to the project at hand.
3. Write! Buy a large beverage, find a nonjiggling table and go to it. Note:
Keep your coffeehouse sacred. Be polite but not excessively friendly to
baristas and regulars. If a friend drops by, tell him that you have five
minutes to talk, but then you really need to get back to work. If he’s not
buying it, tell him you’re on deadline.
4. The walk down: The hike back home is often the most rewarding part of the
process. Still adrift on your creative buzz, you may find that your satellite
dish is more open than ever. It’s a great time to think about what you’ve
written and to contemplate future developments.

As I continued taking my walks along the ocean, searching for inspiration and
frosted glass, it began to seem, in fact, that my novel was scattered along the
beach, like pirate’s treasure, and all I had to do was come along and scoop it up.
The real secret, however, came from my protagonist, Frosted Glass Man, as he
was helping a neophyte who’d lost her “glass vision.” “Let me guess,” he said.
“Suddenly you can’t tell frosted glass from the Queen of England, and you’re
sort of losing your place on the sand. Feeling disoriented.”
“Yeah. That about describes it.”
He grinned. “You’re trying too hard. When you begin to lose your sight, just
rub the last piece you found, and listen to the ocean.”
MICHAEL J. VAUGHN is the author of twelve novels, most recently Billy Saddle, inspired by the
story of Chicago Cubs fan Steve Bartman. He is also an active poet, with more than one hundred
poems published in journals.

Part 2
PLOT & CONFLICT:
Your Story’s Action & Suspense

Chapter 8

STORY TRUMPS STRUCTURE
BY STEVEN JAMES
Imagine that I’m telling you about my day and I say, “I woke up. I ate breakfast.
I left for work.”
Is that a story? After all, it has a protagonist who makes choices that lead to a
natural progression of events, it contains three acts and it has a beginning, a
middle, and an end—and that’s what makes something a story, right?
Well, actually, no.
It’s not.
My description of what I did this morning—while it may meet those
commonly accepted criteria—contains no crisis, no struggle, no discovery, no
transformation in the life of the main character. It’s a report, but it’s not a story.
Over the years as I’ve taught at writing conferences around the world, you
should see some of the looks I’ve gotten when I tell people to stop thinking of a
story in terms of its structure. And it’s easy to understand why. Spend enough
time with writers or English teachers and you’ll hear the dictum that a story is
something that has a beginning, middle, and end. I know that the people who
share this definition mean well, but it’s really not a very helpful one for
storytellers. After all, a description of a pickle has a beginning, a middle, and an
end, but it’s not a story. The sentence, “Preheat the oven to 450 degrees,” has
those basic elements, but it’s not a story either.
So then, what is a story?
Centuries ago, Aristotle noted in his book Poetics that while a story does
have a beginning, a middle, and an ending, the beginning is not simply the first

event in a series of three, but rather the emotionally engaging originating event.
The middle is the natural and causally related consequence, and the end is the
inevitable conclusive event.
In other words, stories have an origination, an escalation of conflict, and a
resolution.
Of course, stories also need a vulnerable character, a setting that’s integral to
the narrative, meaningful choices that determine the outcome of the story, and
reader empathy. But at its most basic level, a story is a transformation unveiled
—either the transformation of a situation or, most commonly, the transformation
of a character.
Simply put, you do not have a story until something goes wrong.
At its heart, a story is about a person dealing with tension, and tension is
created by unfulfilled desire. Without forces of antagonism, without setbacks,
without a crisis event that initiates the action, you have no story. The secret,
then, to writing a story that draws readers in and keeps them turning pages is not
to make more and more things happen to a character, and especially not to
follow some preordained plot formula or novel-writing template. Instead the key
to writing better stories is to focus on creating more and more tension as your
story unfolds.
Understanding the fundamentals at the heart of all good stories will help you
tell your own stories better—and sell more of them, too. Imagine you’re baking
a cake. You mix together certain ingredients in a specific order and end up with a
product that is uniquely different than any individual ingredient. In the process
of mixing and then baking the cake, these ingredients are transformed into
something delicious.
That’s what you’re trying to do when you bake up a story.
So let’s look at five essential story ingredients, and then review how to mix
them together to make your story so good readers will ask for seconds.

INGREDIENT #1: ORIENTATION

The beginning of a story must grab the reader’s attention; orient her to the
setting, mood, and tone of the story; and introduce her to a protagonist she will
care about, even worry about, and emotionally invest time and attention into. If
readers don’t care about your protagonist, they won’t care about your story,
either.
So, what’s the best way to introduce this all-important character? In essence,
you want to set reader expectations and reveal a portrait of the main character by
giving readers a glimpse of her normal life. If your protagonist is a detective, we
want to see him at a crime scene. If you’re writing romance, we want to see
normal life for the young woman who’s searching for love. Whatever portrait
you draw of your character’s life, keep in mind that it will also serve as a
promise to your readers of the transformation that this character will undergo as
the story progresses.
For example, if you introduce us to your main character, Frank, the happily
married man next door, readers instinctively know that Frank’s idyllic life is
about to be turned upside down—most likely by the death of either his spouse or
his marriage. Something will soon rock the boat, and he will be altered forever.
Because when we read about harmony at the start of a story, it’s a promise that
discord is about to come. Readers expect this.
Please note that normal life doesn’t mean pain-free life. The story might
begin while your protagonist is depressed, hopeless, grieving, or trapped in a
sinking submarine. Such circumstances could be what’s typical for your
character at this moment. When that happens, it’s usually another crisis (whether
internal or external) that will serve to kick-start the story. Which brings us to the
second ingredient.

INGREDIENT #2: CRISIS
This crisis that tips your character’s world upside down must, of course, be one
that your protagonist cannot immediately solve. It’s an unavoidable, irrevocable
challenge that sets the movement of the story into motion.

Typically your protagonist will have the harmony of both his external world
and his internal world upset by the crisis that initiates the story. One of these two
imbalances might have happened before the beginning of the story, but usually at
least one will occur on the page for your readers to experience with your
protagonist, and the interplay of these two dynamics will drive the story forward.
Depending on the genre, the crisis that alters your character’s world might be
a call to adventure—a quest that leads to a new land, or a prophecy or revelation
that he’s destined for great things. Mythic, fantasy, and science-fiction novels
often follow this pattern. In crime fiction, the crisis might be a new assignment
to a seemingly unsolvable case. In romance, the crisis might be undergoing a
divorce or breaking off an engagement.
In each case, though, life is changed and it will never be the same again.
George gets fired. Amber’s son is kidnapped. Larry finds out his cancer is
terminal. Whatever it is, the normal life of the character is forever altered, and
she is forced to deal with the difficulties that this crisis brings.
There are two primary ways to introduce a crisis into your story: Either begin
the story by letting your character have what he desires most and then rip it
away, or deny him what he desires most and then dangle it in front of him. So
he’ll either lose something vital and spend the story trying to regain it, or he’ll
see something desirable and spend the story trying to obtain it.
Say you’ve imagined a character who desires love more than anything else.
His deepest fear will be abandonment. You’ll either want to introduce the
character by showing him in a satisfying, loving relationship, and then insert a
crisis that destroys it, or you’ll want to show the character’s initial longing for a
mate, and then dangle a promising relationship just out of his reach so that he
can pursue it throughout the story.
Likewise, if your character desires freedom most, then he’ll try to avoid
enslavement. So you might begin by showing that he’s free, and then enslave
him, or begin by showing that he’s enslaved, and then thrust him into a freedompursuing adventure.

It all has to do with what the main character desires, and what he wishes to
avoid.

INGREDIENT #3: ESCALATION
There are two types of characters in every story: pebble people and putty people.
If you take a pebble and throw it against a wall, it’ll bounce off the wall
unchanged. But if you throw a ball of putty against a wall hard enough, it will
change shape.
Always in a story, your main character needs to be a putty person.
When you throw him into the crisis of the story, he is forever changed, and
he will take whatever steps he can to try and solve his struggle—that is, to get
back to his original shape (life before the crisis).
But he will fail.
Because he’ll always be a different shape at the end of the story than he was
at the beginning. If he’s not, readers won’t be satisfied.
Putty people are altered.
Pebble people remain the same. They’re like set pieces. They appear onstage
in the story, but they don’t change in essential ways as the story progresses.
They’re the same at the ending as they were at the beginning.
And they are not very interesting.
So exactly what kind of wall are we throwing our putty person against?
First, stop thinking of plot in terms of what happens in your story. Rather,
think of it as payoff for the promises you’ve made early in the story. Plot is the
journey toward transformation.
As I mentioned earlier, typically two crisis events interweave to form the
multilayered stories that today’s readers expect: an external struggle that needs
to be overcome and an internal struggle that needs to be resolved. As your story
progresses, then, the consequences of not solving those two struggles need to
become more and more intimate, personal, and devastating.

Then, as the stakes are raised, the two struggles will serve to drive the story
forward and deepen reader engagement and interest.
Usually if a reader says she’s bored or that “nothing’s happening in the
story,” she doesn’t necessarily mean that events aren’t occurring, but rather that
she doesn’t see the protagonist taking natural, logical steps to try and solve his
struggle.
During the escalation stage of your story, let your character take steps to try
and resolve the two crises (internal and external) and get back to the way things
were earlier, before his world was tipped upside down.

INGREDIENT #4: DISCOVERY
At the climax of the story, the protagonist will make a discovery that changes his
life.
Typically this discovery will be made through wit (as the character cleverly
pieces together clues from earlier in the story) or grit (as the character shows
extraordinary perseverance or tenacity) to overcome the crisis event (or meet the
calling) he’s been given.
The internal discovery and the external resolution help reshape our putty
person’s life and circumstances forever.
The protagonist’s discovery must come from a choice that she makes, not
simply by chance or from a Wise Answer Giver. While mentors might guide a
character toward self-discovery, the decisions and courage that determine the
outcome of the story must come from the protagonist.
In one of the paradoxes of storytelling, the reader wants to predict how the
story will end (or how it will get to the end), but he wants to be wrong. So the
resolution of the story will be most satisfying when it ends in a way that is both
inevitable and unexpected.

INGREDIENT #5: CHANGE

Think of a caterpillar entering a cocoon. Once he does so, one of two things will
happen: He will either transform into a butterfly, or he will die. But no matter
what else happens, he will never climb out of the cocoon as a caterpillar.
So it is with your protagonist.
As you frame your story and develop your character, ask yourself, “What is
my caterpillar doing?” Your character will either be transformed into someone
more mature, insightful, or at peace, or will plunge into death or despair.
Although genre can dictate the direction of this transformation—horror
stories will often end with some kind of death (physical, psychological,
emotional, or spiritual)—most genres are butterfly genres. Most stories end with
the protagonist experiencing new life—whether that’s physical renewal,
psychological understanding, emotional healing, or a spiritual awakening.
This change marks the resolution of the crisis and the culmination of the
story.
As a result of facing the struggle and making this new discovery, the
character will move to a new normal. The character’s actions or attitude at the
story’s end show us how she’s changed from the story’s inception. The putty has
become a new shape, and if it’s thrown against the wall again, the reader will
understand that a brand-new story is now unfolding. The old way of life has
been forever changed by the process of moving through the struggle to the
discovery and into a new and different life.

LETTING STRUCTURE FOLLOW STORY
I don’t have any idea how many acts my novels contain.
A great many writing instructors, classes and manuals teach that all stories
should have three acts—and, honestly, that doesn’t make much sense to me.
After all, in theater, you’ll find successful one-act, two-act, three-act, and fouract plays. And most assuredly, they are all stories.
If you’re writing a novel that people won’t read in one sitting (which is
presumably every novel), your readers could care less about how many acts

there are—in fact, they probably won’t even be able to keep track of them. What
readers really care about is the forward movement of the story as it escalates to
its inevitable and unexpected conclusion.
While it’s true that structuring techniques can be helpful tools, unfortunately,
formulaic approaches frequently send stories spiraling off in the wrong direction
or, just as bad, handcuff the narrative flow. Often the people who advocate
funneling your story into a predetermined three-act structure will note that
stories have the potential to sag or stall out during the long second act. And
whenever I hear that, I think, Then why not shorten it? Or chop it up and include
more acts? Why let the story suffer just so you can follow a formula?
I have a feeling that if you asked the people who teach three-act structure if
they’d rather have a story that closely follows their format or one that intimately
connects with readers, they would go with the latter. Why? Because I’m
guessing that deep down, even they know that in the end, story trumps structure.
Once I was speaking with another writing instructor and he told me that the
three acts form the skeleton of a story. I wasn’t sure how to respond to that until
I was at an aquarium with my daughter later that week and I saw an octopus. I
realized that it got along pretty well without a skeleton. A storyteller’s goal is to
give life to a story, not to stick in bones that aren’t necessary for that species of
tale.
So stop thinking of a story as something that happens in three acts, or two
acts, or four or seven, or as something that is driven by predetermined elements
of plot. Rather think of your story as an organic whole that reveals a
transformation in the life of your character. The number of acts or events should
be determined by the movement of the story, not the other way around.
Because story trumps structure.
If you render a portrait of the protagonist’s life in such a way that we can
picture his world and also care about what happens to him, we’ll be drawn into
the story. If you present us with an emotionally stirring crisis or calling, we’ll get
hooked. If you show the stakes rising as the character struggles to solve this

crisis, you’ll draw us in more deeply. And if you end the story in a surprising yet
logical way that reveals a transformation of the main character’s life, we’ll be
satisfied and anxious to read your next story.
The ingredients come together, and the cake tastes good.
Always be ready to avoid formulas, discard acts, and break the “rules” for
the sake of the story—which is another way of saying: Always be ready to do it
for the sake of your readers.
STEVEN JAMES is a best-selling, critically acclaimed thriller author who has published more than
thirty books across genres.

Chapter 9

MAP YOUR NOVEL WITH A REVERSE OUTLINE
BY N.M. KELBY
We can all benefit from a sense of organization. I like to think of a novel outline
as the bones of a story. As a child, your bones grow to the place where they’ll
support who you are meant to be on this planet. If your genes determine that
you’re tall, your bones will form that foundation and your flesh will grow
accordingly. As you grow older, you need calcium, and bones provide it to the
point where they become brittle and can easily break.
This is the same with outlines. You need to create the basic framework for
your story to grow on but not so much that it takes away the energy from the
work.
So where do you begin? Arthur Miller once said, “If I see an ending, I can
work backward.” So start with the end.

KNOW YOUR ENDING BEFORE YOU START
If you start with the end of the story, the ending won’t be set in concrete; it can
change. But starting with what you think is the end allows you to have a firm
idea of where you are going when you begin a journey with 60,000 to 80,000
words in tow. And you’ll need that. Once you decide on your ending, everything
in the book will be shaped to arrive there. None of your characters should be
superfluous, nor should your scenes. It’s all about bones.
Of course, the most difficult part of writing any story, long or short, is ending
it.
In order to write your ending, you have to ask yourself what action you want
to set forth in the start. But be careful not to create a “purse-string” ending—

with all the elements brought together in a tidy bundle. At the end of your story,
you don’t want to give readers the sense that all there is to know is already
known. You really just want to give them a whisper and a dream, and send them
on their way.
Once your ending is in place, you can weave your tale. Novelist Tony Earley
always says, “A story is about a thing and another thing.” So it’s your job to plan
your story so that you give your reader the satisfaction of getting closure from
one “thing,” the most obvious thing, but keep the mystery of the other “thing”
intact.
A good example of this can be found in Sherman Alexie’s “What You Pawn I
Will Redeem,” the short story about a homeless Spokane Indian’s circular
attempts to raise $1,000 to redeem his grandmother’s powwow regalia from a
pawnshop. The shop owner would like to give it back, but he paid $1,000 for it
himself. So he gives the homeless man $5 as seed money and twenty-four hours
to raise the rest of the cash.
In the first paragraph, Alexie gives the reader notice and sets up the ending
of his story:
One day you have a home and the next you don’t, but I’m not going to tell
you my particular reasons for being homeless, because it’s my secret story,
and Indians have to work hard to keep secrets from hungry white folks.
The idea of a “secret story” is the key to the ending. While the protagonist does
manage to earn money, he drinks, gambles, or gives it away. After twenty-four
hours, the money has not been raised, but the pawnbroker gives him the regalia
anyway. The last paragraph of the story is this:
Outside, I wrapped myself in my grandmother’s regalia and breathed her in. I
stepped off the sidewalk and into the intersection. Pedestrians stopped. Cars
stopped. The city stopped. They all watched me dance with my grandmother.
I was my grandmother, dancing.

Because the regalia is given back, the story does seem to tie itself up (that would
be the first “thing”), but this really isn’t about getting a stolen dress back. It’s
about the struggle to regain one’s spirit—and that could be seen as the “secret”
story (or the other thing) wrapped in this tall tale.
The ending that satisfies the reader, or ties things up, is never the real ending
of the story. We discover that the grandmother’s regalia is returned, and yet the
story continued on for a moment to put the act into context. Alexie left the
readers with a whisper and a dream, and sent them on their way.

OUTLINE YOUR STORY SIMPLY AND BRIEFLY
There is no set amount of pages in an outline because it all depends on how large
a story you’re going to tell. The story of Harry Potter and the Order of the
Phoenix had thirty-eight chapters that spanned 870 pages. Its table of contents
provides an interesting look at the bones of an outline. It begins:
One: Dudley Demented
Two: A Peck of Owls
Three: The Advance Guard
If you were J.K. Rowling, and this was your outline, all you’d have to do is write
a short summary paragraph after the title of each chapter. In the first chapter, you
would tell us why Dudley is demented and make sure that there are bits in your
description that set the action of the book in play. Then move on to the next
chapter.
To build the bones of your own outline, begin by writing a short description
of what happens in the last chapter, and then move to the first chapter. After
that’s done, divide the rest of Act 1 into as many chapters as it takes to properly
introduce your protagonist and the conflict—the “who,” “what,” “when,” and
“where” of the tale.
Move on to Act 2 and, again, create as many chapters as it takes to explain
the crisis, complications, and obstacles that present themselves on the

protagonist’s way to the climax. Make note of the emotional challenges that he
faces.
Once you’ve written the climax, it’s time to create as many chapters as you’ll
need to lead to the final chapter.
Try not to get too fancy with the writing. If your agent is going to pitch your
outline, he’s going to take fifty pages of the draft with him, so you don’t need to
show any style in the outline. This is all about bones.
N.M. KELBY is the author of The Constant Art of Being a Writer. Her story “Jubilation, Florida”
was selected for NPR’s “Selected Shorts.”

Give Your Story Idea a Litmus Test
To see if you can turn your initial story idea into a real novel, you have to decide if it has legs
or not.
Step One: Answer these questions to the best of your ability. There are no wrong answers,
but there are answers that inspire you to write on … and that’s what you’re looking for.
1. What about the idea draws you in? What’s the most important element of it to you?
2. Who could the players be? Not just the people who inspired you to follow your
idea, but the supporting characters. What types of people would be involved in the
situation? Who are the friends? Who are the enemies? Try to create a quick
biography of each in which you explore their relationships to one another and to
the protagonist. What do they sound like when they speak? Don’t forget to add
physical descriptions, aspirations, and even their favorite cologne, if you know it.
3. Where and when does the story take place? Keep in mind that the details of the
incident that sparked you may not be where you choose to set your novel.
Whatever you do, make the setting as concrete as possible. Every reader needs a
sense of being grounded.
4. What are the possibilities for conflict? Don’t just settle for what actually happened.
Now that you have a chance to imagine this idea in a more fleshed-out manner,
ask yourself what could happen given who the characters you’ve created are, in
addition to where they are in this world that you’ve made.
Step Two: Write. This is the difficult part. Once you’ve decided the particulars of the story you
want to tell, you need to just start writing it. Begin with what you think is the first chapter. Then
write the next. Or just write a couple of chapters out of sequence. When you reach fifty

pages, try to write your outline. If you can’t, keep writing until you can’t any more, and then try
again. You’re not looking for publishable pages, you’re just looking to unlock the possibility of
story.

Chapter 10

WRITE WELL-CRAFTED SCENES TO SUPPORT YOUR
STORY
BY JAMES SCOTT BELL
A great story premise will not stand without solid scenes to prop it up. Colorful
characters can flit across the page, but unless they are engaged in battle, the
reader just won’t care.
Don’t let your scenes fall into cliché or monotony. Always look for ways to
freshen them up. Here are five techniques to help you do that.

1. MAKE YOUR DIALOGUE FLOW
Try writing a scene in only dialogue. Let it flow. Don’t think much about it.
When you’re finished, you can look back and figure out what the scene is really
about.
I once wrote a scene between competing lawyers. Part of it went like this:
“You think you can get away with that?”
“Whatever works.”
“Disbarment works, too.”
“You want to try to prove that? Know what that’ll make you look like?”
“Don’t presume to know what I will or will not do.”
“I know you better than your wife, Phil.”
That last line of dialogue came out of nowhere. Why did the character say that? I
could have just edited it out, of course, but it seemed far better to explore the
implications. What that led to was a plot point where the one lawyer revealed

he’d had an investigator on Phil for six months. And he had pictures and places
and dates Phil would not want revealed to his wife.
All that just from playing with dialogue. Try it, and you’ll discover
undercurrents for your scene you didn’t know were there.

2. CUT OR HIDE EXPOSITION
Any time the author gives information in narrative form, the immediate story is
put on hold. This exposition, if you don’t watch it, can bloat and choke off a
good scene.
Look for exposition you don’t need. If it’s not crucial for the moment, delay
it. If it’s not crucial for the overall story, cut it. The more important information
can often be “hidden” by putting it into either dialogue or a character’s thoughts.

3. FLIP THE OBVIOUS
Our minds work by reaching for the most familiar choices available. For writers
that usually means a cliché. So learn to flip things.
If your characters are mere types, your scenes won’t engage the readers.
Imagine a truck driver rumbling down the highway at midnight, holding the
steering wheel in one hand and a cup of hot black coffee in the other.
Got that?
Now I’ll bet the first image your mind provided was of a burly male,
probably wearing a baseball cap or cowboy hat. That’s a familiar image of a
trucker. It’s a cliché, and therefore not very interesting. But what if you flipped it
around? What if the trucker was a woman?
Try it.
Now you have an image to play with. But I’ll wager you still pictured a
rather “tough” woman, because all truckers are tough, right?
Flip that around. Put this woman in a nice evening dress. What does that do
for your image? Why is she dressed that way? Where is she going? Who is after
her? You can also play this game with descriptions and dialogue.

“It’s about time we started the meeting,” Johnson said. “Let’s do an agenda
check.”
“Right,” Smith said. “First up is the Norwood project. Second, the P&L
statement. Third, staffing.”
Stop a moment and flip the obvious response:
“It’s about time we started the meeting,” Johnson said. “Let’s do an agenda
check.”
“Do it yourself,” Smith said.
The nice part about this exercise is that even if you decide to stick with your
original dialogue, the list you come up with provides you with possible subtext
or insights about your character.
Play this game, and you’re guaranteed to yield fresh material for characters,
scenes, and dialogue.

4. APPLY THE CLOSED-EYES TECHNIQUE
Describing a physical setting in rich detail is crucial to a vivid scene. Where do
such details come from? Say your hero has just entered a house where a friend
lives. Close your eyes and “see” this house. Then record what you see as if you
were a reporter on the scene. Describe all of the details as they are revealed to
you. Later go back and edit out what you don’t need. By doing it this way, you’ll
give yourself plenty of good, raw material to work with.

5. KNOW WHAT YOU’RE AIMING FOR
Every scene in your novel should have that moment or exchange that is the focal
point, the bull’s-eye, the thing you’re aiming at. If your scene doesn’t have a
bull’s-eye, it should be cut or rewritten.
A bull’s-eye can be a few lines of dialogue that turn the action around or
reveal something striking. It can be as subtle as a moment of realization or as

explicit as a gunshot to the heart. Many times it is found in the last paragraph or
two. Identify that moment so you know what you’re writing toward. Then hit the
bull’s-eye. You may be a little off target in the first draft, but that’s what
rewriting is for. You’ll hit it the second or third time.
JAMES SCOTT BELL is a best-selling and award-winning suspense writer. He is the author of
Plot & Structure, Revision & Self-Editing, and The Art of War for Writers.

Chapter 11

USE BRAIDING TO LAYER YOUR STORY LINE
BY HEATHER SELLERS
We start so many books. Writing for twenty, fifty, seventy pages, all high hopes
and happy plan, and then stopping. Bottoming out. In the middle. Again and
again.
One reason so many books-in-progress die on the vine is because there isn’t
enough spark, enough energy in the original design, to drive the project all the
way through the middle and close the deal. The middle of a book is often
compared to a lonely and vast desert the writer has to hike across. It’s easy to get
lost. It’s easy to give up.
To get across the middle, your work must involve some element of discovery
—something you have to figure out as you write. Otherwise your writing will
feel canned, preplanned, flat. Like stale popcorn.
This is where braiding comes in.

INTRODUCE LAYERS INTO YOUR STORIES
Braided books (or articles or stories) are made up of three or four strands, or
story lines. Three seems to be the ideal number (for book writing as for
hairstyling). Instead of slogging through one story line and then flatlining
somewhere in the middle, braids help you mix it up. You tell three stories, bit by
bit. The juxtapositions lend life and surprise, tension and drama. You work in
small, manageable sections, folding in new material. Things stay fresh and
lively.
For example, in a braided novel about divorce and reconciliation, you would
tell the story of the divorce a little at a time, interspersing the teenage daughter’s

first romance with the story of the live-in mother-in-law and her crazy scheme to
bring fame to the town. You tell three smaller, simpler stories—one of loss, one
of love, and one of generation—in small, bite-sized pieces. It is much easier to
work this way: one section at a time, from each of the three “source” stories.
To braid, imagine yourself going through family photos from three different
trips. The Bahamas honeymoon photos, the photos from the American Indian
mounds trip when the kids were babies, and photos of your mother from the last
time you visited. Take the most interesting photos from each trip or strand, and
lay them out to tell a story. Start with the Bahamas kissing photo. Then choose
one from the mounds trip: the one with the kids all in a heap, laughing, but
Shelly is yanking Em’s hair, hard. Then your mother, alone, in the doorway, the
light on her face so she looks like she did when she was a child. A lot like Shelly,
come to think of it.
And then you cycle through again, until you have enough images to tell a
story. With three sources feeding your book, it’s easier to keep things fresh and
alive.

VISUALIZE EACH SEPARATE STORY LINE
For fiction or a memoir, braid with images from each of your three story lines
and you come up with photolike moments: 1-2-3, 1-2-3. For other nonfiction,
choose topics or approaches. A refrigerator repair manual has three kinds of
information: stuff you need to observe carefully with your eyes (is the ice
buildup clear or snowy?), tools and how to use them, and basic diagrams for how
the fridge is put together. The manual’s sections cycle through these three kinds
of information. You work in little blocks.
Last year, I judged a major national essay contest. It was an interesting
experience, because only about 10 percent of the pieces even remotely worked.
Most fell flat because they were about one thing, something the writers had
already decided the pieces would be about. No room to wiggle around, get lost,
wonder about the deeper nature of things, wander off to the side a bit, discover

the interesting, previously unnoticed thing. Those authors each had one thing to
say, and gosh darn it, they were going to say it, come hell or high water.
Sermons, rants at teenagers, lectures for college students (especially
freshmen), even love letters—these may work like that. But not art.
Art relies on surprise. In order to engage the reader (and yourself as a writer),
you have to braid. You can’t be confusing, but you can’t spell it all out, either.
The human mind, when it reads, needs something to figure out. You can’t just go
on and on about the refrigerator compressor, the history of the compressor, the
likes and dislikes of the compressor, particular compressor models, and so on.

ENCOURAGE HAPPY ACCIDENTS
You need more than one thing going on at a time. And you don’t need to know
how everything will work out. When you braid, happy accidents occur—the
image of your mother’s friends in the retirement home singing off-key for her
birthday, all of them crying, inspires you to write a child’s unhappy birthday
scene. You would never have thought of it without the prompting of the braiding
activity; often these inspired surprises produce some of our best writing.
In my memoir about the neurological disorder that impairs my ability to
recognize faces, I have three braids—three photo albums to draw from.
Childhood. Recognition problems because of my condition. And the story of my
marriage and divorce. I trust in the possibilities of how the stories will refract off
one another. When I tell the story of my Florida childhood, divorce will be in
some of the images. Marriage is about recognizing another person, deeply,
profoundly. My braids twine in and out of one another. Coming of age, an
illness, a marriage—the book teaches me what it is about as I write it. That’s the
best way to write a book: to follow a structure that allows you to discover wise
insights, images, and a natural organization as you go along.

DIVIDE YOUR STORY INTO THREES

If you are concerned about organization, try dividing your book into three
substories or three subthemes. You can write each one straight through. Or you
can divide and conquer, working on each strand a little bit at a time. Most
braiders do a little of both.
I asked my students to do a braided essay using completely unrelated topics;
the only requirement was that they write things that mattered a lot to them. For
Braid One, Christian chose to write about his experience in a tug-of-war ritual at
our college that takes place over the Black River. For Braid Two, he excerpted
journal entries from his great-great-great-great-uncle Pieter Damstra, one of the
first Dutch settlers of our present-day community. For Braid Three, Christian
told stories of terrible dates from his sophomore year, where he said stupid
things, drove women away, or broke up for no real reason.
It’s one of the best student pieces I have ever read. In class, everyone praised
Christian for the subtle patterns he drew between relatives, dating, and tug-ofwar. Christian smiled at us and said, “What patterns?”
He didn’t see that when his ancestor talked about how his wife, Albatross,
was really annoying on the boat on the way over—which came up the Black
River, the very river over which Christian tugged—there was an echo, a
refraction, a little mirror in the writing. He didn’t see what the class could see in
his piece: Love is a tug-of-war. Ancestors pull you back. Christian thought he
was being lazy and cheating by using the journal excerpts because he had written
less than the other students. His old Dutch relatives worried all the time that they
weren’t working hard enough, too. I could go on and on—and in class, we did.
Braid Your Story
Look at your book in terms of a braid structure. Have a friend or writing-group partner (since
it’s hard to rethink your own work on the structural level) separate three story lines. You may
need to create a new line to complicate your story, or you may want to promote a line from
within the existing structure to more emphatically triangulate what is already there.

Construct a new outline based on this structure and limit yourself to very small flashes or
glimpses—like photographs or snapshots—for the entire length of each strand.
If this doesn’t work the first time, try it again. Or try it with a different project, not the one
you are working on now, just to introduce your brain to this new kind of structure. If you are
one of the many people who think in terms of “the next three books I want to write,” you are a
good candidate for braiding.

USE BRAIDS FOR REVISION, TOO
Braiding also works as a revision strategy. Many pieces that aren’t working are
actually fine—they’re just not complex enough. They are the Braid A, and they
will not come to life, no matter what you do, until you spark-feed them with a
Braid B, and then a Braid C.
This is true for articles, poems, essays, novels, nonfiction books, everything.
Every episode of Friends is braided, for instance. Notice your conversations
with your friends. Braided. Notice your favorite video games. What are the
braids?
Be aware of the connections, but leave lots of room for discovery. After the
draft is up and running, you can shape and bend. But braid first. And watch the
sparks start flying.
Good writing has layers. It does more than one thing. It leaves room for the
reader to go, Aha!
HEATHER SELLERS is the author of Page After Page, Chapter After Chapter, and her memoir,
You Don’t Look Like Anyone I Know.

Chapter 12

CRAFT AN OPENING SCENE THAT LURES READERS INTO
CHAPTER TWO
BY LES EDGERTON
It’s a well-known fact that a tremendous number of manuscripts never get read
by agents and editors. Wait. Amend that to: A tremendous number of possibly
good and even brilliant novels and short stories and other literary forms never
get read beyond the first few paragraphs or pages by agents and editors. Why?
Simple: The stories don’t begin in the right place. When an agent or editor
encounters a poor beginning, she doesn’t bother to continue reading.
The opening of your story carries an awesome responsibility. Consider this:
The goals of your opening scene are: (1) to successfully introduce the storyworthy problem; (2) to hook the readers; (3) to establish the rules of the story;
and (4) to forecast the ending of the story. If your opening fails to accomplish
any one of these elements, then guess what? Your opening will fail. To ensure
that your opening doesn’t have any lethal lapses, let’s take a closer look at each
of the opening obligations.

INTRODUCE THE PROBLEM
This is the opening’s most important goal. Without a story-worthy problem, your
story doesn’t have much chance of success. The problem is the heart and soul of
the story. The majority of the novel or story contains the protagonist’s struggle to
resolve this problem. You must set the stage for the story-worthy problem’s
eventual unveiling (which is gradually revealed) right from the get go to give the
reader a compelling reason to keep turning the page. This is done via an inciting

incident, which is the event that triggers the first surface problem and sets the
story into motion.
It’s important to note that the word trouble in fiction terms doesn’t carry the
same definition as it does in real life. A wife leaving a husband, someone losing
a job, a murder next door, or even in the protagonist’s own household don’t, by
themselves, qualify as trouble in fiction terms. Trouble, in literary terms, means
the protagonist’s world has been profoundly altered by some event—not altered
in terms of material or surface things, such as a loss of income, the death of a
loved one, or an injury but in terms of the inner psychological world of the
character being significantly changed for the worse. For instance, the loss of
one’s job and perhaps even livelihood, while drastic in real life, isn’t enough to
sustain a story. If the character has tied his sense of self to his profession,
however, then losing a job can easily represent an inner psychological problem
and be transformed from merely a bad situation into a story-worthy problem.
Just as a story about characters who experience only good things in their
lives is boring to everyone except family members and friends, a story about
people to whom bad things happen—but with no effect on their inner
psychological selves—is just as boring. A character with a Job-like existence
isn’t all that interesting, but when we find out his sorry existence is caused by a
deity testing his faith and his battle to maintain it or even fight its loss, then the
story becomes interesting.

HOOK THE READER
A hook is something that intrigues the reader, and it can be virtually anything
that makes the reader want to continue reading. It can be a story question—will
the protagonist overcome the daunting problem confronting him—or it can be
the author’s lovely language or any of a dozen and one other things.
Good hooks have strong inciting incidents that plunge the protagonist
immediately into trouble—the trouble that’s going to occupy the rest of the story.
There are authors who compel the reader to invest time with solely the beauty of

their prose, but you shouldn’t rely on your facile command of language to draw
in the reader. The surest way to involve the reader is to begin with an opening
scene that changes the protagonist’s world profoundly and creates a story-worthy
problem.
A good hook can have other facets. Here’s one hook that operates on several
levels, from Jo-Anne Michiel Watts’ short story “What’s Not to Enjoy?”:
A few days before Thanksgiving I get a terrific recipe from the Turkey
Hotline Lady while Dyna and I make love.
What a superb opening—who could possibly resist reading on? There are
questions galore in this opening. First, what sort of person not only remembers
getting a “terrific recipe” while making love but also places more importance on
the recipe than the sexual act itself? What kind of person notices recipes she
overhears on the radio while making love? Why is it important for the author to
mention specifically that this happened just before Thanksgiving?
And then, the language itself draws us in. There’s intelligent, understated
humor in this first sentence, and that tells us that this story will likely make us at
least smile—always a good feeling to have from a story’s beginning. “The
Turkey Hotline Lady” is just plain funny. Further, Watts employs a
conversational style of language that gives us the sense that a friend is relating
the tale to us.
Watts’ opening is a great example of a hook that does just what hooks are
meant to do: draw the reader in and make him want to read more. And the fact
that the narrator/protagonist chooses to report on a recipe rather than on
lovemaking tells us there’s trouble ahead.

ESTABLISH STORY RULES
A novel (and short story) has certain rules—rules you, as the author, must
establish and convey to readers so your story can be read intelligently. These
rules can be almost anything you desire, so long as they follow one ironclad

dictum: They must be consistent. You can’t begin your novel by writing
somberly about serious stuff, and then switch on page 30 to a black-comedy
treatment of the material. You have to establish what kind of story it’s going to
be from the very beginning. Don’t try to fool readers. They won’t forgive you.
However you begin the story—voice, tone, the way the story is narrated— that’s
the way it has to continue through the ending. Consistency is key to writing a
good novel.
The beginning must be connected to the whole of the story. That may seem
to be common sense, but you should never write an opening that’s marginally
related to the story solely to create a hook to draw the reader in.

FORECAST THE ENDING
The beginnings of the best stories often contain at least a hint of the endings. As
T.S. Eliot said, “In my beginning is my end.” When students approach me, stuck
on how to end their stories, my first advice is always to look back at their
beginning, for the answer should lie there. A good example is my own short
story “It’s Different,” which begins:
As a boy, he had watched his mother grow bigger with the child that would
become his sister. The larger her belly grew, the more repulsed he became,
shrinking from her touch, afraid to touch her skin. Two reasons: She might
explode, expel the thing inside her. Her skin, the skin on her upper arms that
had gotten thicker, felt cool, clammy. Skin that enveloped fatness. Now, he
had one himself. A pregnant wife.
The character finds he can’t relate to his wife’s pregnancy, the proof of that
culminating when she attempts sex with him, and he’s unable to respond. When
she goes to sleep, and he gets up and does a crossword puzzle, a combination of
words comes up that leads him to the realization that his relationship with his
mother has led to his revulsion toward his pregnant wife. It comes full circle
when he remembers his own childhood and the feelings he had and what caused

those feelings. The seeds of your ending can often be sown in your beginning,
when it works properly. Begin with a brief hint of what’s to take place at the end,
and you’ll create a story that comes full circle and feels complete.

WHY GOOD BEGINNINGS GO BAD
Perhaps the primary reason for beginning stories in the wrong place is a lack of
trust in the reader’s intelligence. This is the real key to understanding just about
all of the problems that lead to the wrong beginnings. Once you begin to trust the
reader’s intelligence, not only poor beginnings, but many other problems that
prevent stories from becoming published, begin to disappear.
Of course, it’s important to note that the opening scene is developed within a
vacuum. Later scenes benefit from the knowledge conveyed in previous scenes
—knowledge that helps orient the reader in the scene and helps the reader
understand what’s going on with the characters.
Not so in the first scene. Unless the novel is part of an already established
series, the reader knows nothing about the situation or the characters. Thus the
writer’s temptation to furnish backstory is valid, but readers don’t need to know
everything about your characters to fully realize the significance of what’s
happened when the trouble begins.
Intelligent readers understand a lot from a tiny bit of information. Give them
credit for having functional brains. For instance, let’s say you want to write a
story about a man who has something happen that reveals to him that he needs a
healthy relationship with a woman to be complete, but he’s been married and
divorced five times—strong evidence that he’s terrible at relationships.
A writer with little trust in the reader’s intelligence may feel he needs to take
the reader through those five marriages to show how miserable his protagonist is
at relationships. Or perhaps this writer decides not to describe all five marriages,
but describes only one, maybe the last one.
This is a story that won’t get read. The skillful writer, on the other hand,
won’t describe any of these failed marriages. He’ll simply include the fact that

the man’s been married five times. The intelligent reader will infer that the
protagonist is a guy who fails at relationships. What’s ironic is that manuscripts
don’t get rejected because the majority of the story is good and only the
beginning is flawed—they get rejected because the agent or editor never gets to
the good part to begin with.
A story that begins in the wrong place won’t be read past that point. If the
good stuff happens later on, in all likelihood, an agent or editor will never reach
it. A good, quality story beginning is a microcosm of the work entire. If you
capture the right beginning, you’ve written a small version of the whole.
LES EDGERTON has published nine books, including Hooked: Write Fiction That Grabs Readers
at Page One and Never Lets Them Go.

Chapter 13

WRITE A FIVE-STAR CHAPTER ONE
BY ELIZABETH SIMS
When you decide to go to a restaurant for a special dinner, you enjoy the
anticipation. You’ve committed to spending sufficient time and money, and now
you’ve arrived, and the place looks good and smells good. You smile and order
an appetizer. When it comes, you enjoy it as a foretaste of the larger, more
complex courses that will follow, but you also savor it for what it is: a delicious
dish, complete in itself. If it’s a truly great appetizer, you recognize it as an
exquisite blend of flavor, texture, and temperature. And you’re happy, because
you know you’ll be in good hands for the entire evening.
Isn’t that what it’s like to begin reading a terrific book?
The first chapter is the appetizer—small, yet so tremendously important. And
so full of potential.
As an aspiring author, the prospect of writing Chapter One should not
intimidate, but excite the hell out of you. Why? Because no other part of your
book can provide you with the disproportionate payoff that an excellent first
chapter can. Far more than a great query letter, a great Chapter One can attract
the attention of an agent. It can keep a harried editor from yawning and hitting
“delete.” It can make a bookstore browser keep turning pages during the slow
walk to the cash registers. And, yes, it can even keep a bleary-eyed owner of one
of those electronic thingamajigs touching the screen for more, more, more!
Fiction, like food, is an art and a craft. Here’s how to blend inspiration with
technique and serve up an irresistible Chapter One.

RESIST TERROR

Let’s be honest: Agents and editors like to make you quiver and sweat as you
approach Chapter One. All those warnings: “Grab me from the opening
sentence! Don’t waste one word! If my attention flags, you’ve failed—you’re
down the toilet! In fact, don’t even write Chapter One! Start your book at chapter
four! Leave out all that David Copperfield crap!” From their perspective it’s an
acid test. They know how important Chapter One is, and if you’re weak, they’ll
scare you into giving up before you begin. (Hey, it makes their jobs easier: one
less query in the queue.)
Here’s the truth: Agents and editors, all of them, are paper tigers. Every last
one is a hungry kitten searching for something honest, original, and brave to
admire. Now is the time to gather your guts, smile, and let it rip.
Your inner genius flees from tension, so first of all, relax. Notice that I did
not say agents and editors are looking for perfect writing. Nor are they looking
for careful writing. Honest, original, and brave. That’s what they want, and
that’s what you’ll produce if you open up room for mistakes and mediocrity. It’s
true! Only by doing that will you be able to tap into your wild and free core. Let
out the bad with the good now, and you’ll sort it out later.
Second, remember who you are and why you’re writing this book. What is
your book about? What purpose(s) will it serve? Write your answers down and
look at them from time to time as you write. (By the way, it’s okay to want to
write a book simply to entertain people; the noblest art has sprung from just such
a humble desire.)
And third, if you haven’t yet outlined, consider doing so. Even the roughest,
most rustic framework will give you a sharper eye for your beginning and, again,
will serve to unfetter your mind. Your outline could be a simple list of thingsthat-are-gonna-happen, or it could be a detailed chronological narrative of all
your plot threads and how they relate. I find that knowing where I’m headed
frees my mind from everything but the writing at hand. Being prepared makes
you calm and better equipped to tap into your unique voice—which is the most
important ingredient in a good Chapter One.

DECIDE ON TENSE AND POINT OF VIEW
Most readers are totally unconscious of tense and POV; all they care about is the
story. Is it worth reading? Fun to read? But you must consider your tense and
POV carefully, and Chapter One is go time for these decisions. It used to be
simple. You’d choose from:
a) First person: I chased the beer wagon.
b) Third-person limited: Tom chased the beer wagon.
c) Omniscient: Tom chased the beer wagon while the villagers watched and
wondered, Would all the beer in the world be enough for this oaf?
… and you’d always use past tense.
But today, novels mix points of view and even tenses. In my Rita Farmer
novels I shift viewpoints, but limit all POVs to the good guys. By contrast, John
Grisham will shift out of the main character’s POV to the bad guy’s for a
paragraph or two, then back again. (Some critics have labeled this practice
innovative, while others have called it lazy; in the latter case, I’m sure Grisham
is crying all the way to the bank.) It’s also worth noting that studies have shown
that older readers tend to prefer past tense, while younger ones dig the present.
(If that isn’t a statement with larger implications, I don’t know what is.)
Many writing gurus tell you to keep a first novel simple by going with first
person, past tense. This approach has worked for thousands of first novels
(including mine, 2002’s Holy Hell), but I say go for whatever feels right to you,
simple or not. I do, however, recommend that you select present or past tense
and stick with it. Similarly, I advise against flashbacks and flash-forwards for
first novels. Not that they can’t work, but they seem to be off-putting to agents
and editors, who will invariably ask, “Couldn’t this story be told without altering
the time-space continuum?”

The point is, you want your readers to feel your writing is smooth; you don’t
want them to see the rivets in the hull, so to speak. And the easiest way to do that
is to create fewer seams.
If you’re still unsure of your tense or POV choices, try these techniques:
Go to your bookshelf and take a survey of some of your favorite novels.
What POVs and tenses are selected, and why do you suppose the authors chose
those approaches?
Rehearse. Write a scene using first person, then third-person limited, then
omniscient. What feels right?
Don’t forget to consider the needs of your story. If you plan to have
simultaneous action in Fresno, Vienna and Pitcairn, and you want to show it all
in living color, you almost certainly need more than one POV.
And if you’re still in doubt, don’t freeze up—just pick an approach and start
writing. Remember, you can always change it later if you need to.

CHOOSE A NATURAL STARTING POINT
When you read a good novel, it all seems to unfold so naturally, starting from the
first sentence. But when you set out to write your own, you realize your choices
are limitless, and this can be paralyzing. Yet your novel must flow from the first
scene you select.
Let’s say you’ve got an idea for a historical novel that takes place in 1933.
There’s this pair of teenagers who figure out what really happened the night the
Lindbergh baby was abducted, but before they can communicate with the police,
they themselves are kidnapped. Their captives take them to proto-Nazi Germany,
and it turns out there’s some weird relationship between Col. Lindbergh and the
chancellor—or is there? Is the guy with the haircut really Lindbergh? The teens
desperately wonder: What do they want with us?
Sounds complicated. Where should you start? A recap of the Lindbergh
case? The teenagers on a date where one of them stumbles onto a clue in the

remote place they go to make out? A newspaper clipping about a German
defense contract that should have raised eyebrows but didn’t?
Basically, write your way in.
Think about real life. Any significant episode in your own life did not spring
whole from nothing; things happened beforehand that shaped it, and things
happened afterward as a result of it. Think about your novel in this same way.
The characters have pasts and futures (unless you plan to kill them); places, too,
have pasts and futures. Therefore, every storyteller jumps into his story
midstream. Knowing this can help you relax about picking a starting point. The
Brothers Grimm did not begin by telling about the night Hansel and Gretel were
conceived; they got going well into the lives of their little heroes, and they knew
we wouldn’t care about anything but what they’re doing right now.
If you’re unsure where to begin, pick a scene you know you’re going to put
in—you just don’t know where yet—and start writing it. You might discover
your Chapter One right there. And even if you don’t, you’ll have fodder for that
scene when the time comes.
Here are a few other strategies that can help you choose a starting point:
Write a character sketch or two. You need them anyway, and they’re great
warm-ups for Chapter One. Ask yourself: What will this character be doing
when we first meet him? Write it. Again, you might find yourself writing
Chapter One.
Do a chapter-one-only brainstorm and see what comes out.
The truth is, you probably can write a great story starting from any of
several places. If you’ve narrowed it down to two or three beginnings and
still can’t decide, flip a coin and get going. In my hypothetical Lindbergh
thriller, I’d probably pick the date scene, with a shocking clue revealed.
Why? Action!
It’s okay to be extremely loose with your first draft of your first chapter. In fact, I
recommend it. The important thing at this point is to begin.

PRESENT A STRONG CHARACTER RIGHT AWAY
This step might seem obvious, but too many first-time novelists try to lure the
reader into a story by holding back the main character. Having a couple of
subsidiary characters talking about the protagonist can be a terrific technique for
character or plot development at some point, but not at the beginning of your
novel.
When designing your Chapter One, establish your characters’ situation(s).
What do they know at the beginning? What will they learn going forward? What
does their world mean to them?
Who is the strongest character in your story? Watch out; that’s a trick
question. Consider Kazuo Ishiguro’s The Remains of the Day. The main
character, Stevens, is a weak man, yet his presence is as strong as a hero. How?
Ishiguro gave him a voice that is absolutely certain, yet absolutely vacant of selfknowledge. We know Stevens, and because we see his limitations, we know
things will be difficult for him. Don’t be afraid to give all the depth you can to
your main character early in your story. You’ll discover much more about him
later, and you can always revise if necessary.

BE SPARING OF SETTING
Another common error many aspiring novelists make is trying to set an opening
scene in too much depth. You’ve got it all pictured in your head: the colors,
sounds, flavors and feelings. You want everybody to be in the same place with
the story you are. But you’re too close: A cursory—but poignant!—introduction
is what’s needed. Readers will trust you to fill in all the necessary information
later. They simply want to get a basic feel for the setting, whether it’s a lunar
colony or a street in Kansas City.
Pack punch into a few details. Instead of giving the history of the place and
how long the character has been there and what the weather’s like, consider
something like this:

He lived in a seedy neighborhood in Kansas City. When the night freight
passed, the windows rattled in their frames and the dog in the flat below
barked like a maniac.
Later (if you want) you’ll tell all about the house, the street, the neighbors, and
maybe even the dog’s make and model, but for now a couple of sentences like
that are all you need.
But, you object, what of great novels that opened with descriptions of place,
like John Steinbeck’s The Grapes of Wrath or Edna Ferber’s Giant? Ah, in those
books the locale has been crafted with the same care as a character and
effectively used as one. Even so, the environment is presented as the characters
relate to it: in the former case, man’s mark on the land (by indiscriminate
agriculture), and in the latter, man’s mark on the sky (the jet plumes of modern
commerce).
Another way to introduce a setting is to show how a character feels about it.
In Dostoyevsky’s Crime and Punishment, Raskolnikov seethes with resentment
at the opulence around him in St. Petersburg, and this immediately puts us on the
alert about him. The setting serves the character; it does not stand on its own.
Great Chapter Ones in History
Don Quixote Miguel de Cervantes (1617) Quixote is earnest, he’s obsessed with
chivalry, he’s in love with a wench, he’s crazy—and it’s all there in Chapter One.
Jane Eyre Charlotte Brontë (1847) How bad is Jane’s life? Bad! From the first
page, Jane gets trodden down again and again, until you know something’s gonna
give.
Crime and Punishment Fyodor Dostoyevsky (1866) A young man in debt, feeling
sorry for himself, already rationalizing immoral behavior.
Dracula Bram Stoker (1897) After a thimbleful of history, we get frightened
peasants crossing themselves, a castle, moonlight, shadows, howling wolves, and
an unmistakable feeling of impending evil.
Little House in the Big Woods Laura Ingalls Wilder (1932) Chapter One actually
begins, “Once upon a time …” Children love this book because it’s made of stuff

adults don’t expect them to like—it opens with a pig slaughtering, wildcats, bears,
and even deer ready for butchering hanging in trees.
The Violent Bear It Away Flannery O’Connor (1960) Chapter One cuts right to the
bone of what so many other authors dance around and never get to: ultimate
motivations, absolute morality, and the harsh requirements of a fundamental God.
Primal fury!
Coma Robin Cook (1977) Deft character development plus unsettling medical
detail forms a breakthrough idea—and a big what if?
The Remains of the Day Kazuo Ishiguro (1988) You feel bludgeoned by Stevens’
moral and emotional cluelessness; when you realize with horror that he’s going to
be at your side through the whole story, you cannot walk away.
On Chesil Beach Ian McEwan (2007) A long Chapter One that quietly presents
enormous conflict, sharpened by the fact that only one of the two characters knows
it.

USE CAREFULLY
IMMEDIACY

CHOSEN

DETAIL

TO

CREATE

Your Chapter One must move along smartly, but in being economical you cannot
become vague. Difficult, you say? It’s all in the context.
The genius of books as diverse as Miguel de Cervantes’ Don Quixote and
Robin Cook’s Coma lies in the authors’ generosity with good, authentic detail.
Cervantes knew that a suit of armor kept in a junk locker for years wouldn’t
merely be dusty, it would be corroded to hell—and that would be a problem to
overcome. Likewise, Cook, himself a doctor, knew that a patient prepped for
surgery would typically be given a calming drug before the main anesthetic—
and that some patients, somehow, do not find peace even under the medication,
especially if they have reason not to.
If you’re an expert on something, go ahead and show that you know what
you’re talking about. One of the reasons my novel Damn Straight, a story
involving a professional golfer, won a Lambda Award is that I know golf, and let
my years of (painful) experience inform the book. I felt I’d done a good job
when reviewer after reviewer wrote, “I absolutely hate golf, but I love how Sims
writes about it in this novel. …”

Let’s say your Chapter One begins with your main character getting a root
canal. You could show the dentist nattering on and on as dentists tend to do, and
that would be realistic, but it could kill your chapter, as in this example:
Dr. Payne’s running commentary included the history of fillings, a story
about the first time he ever pulled a tooth, and a funny anecdote about how
his college roommate got really drunk every weekend.
Bored yet? Me too. Does that mean there’s too much detail? No. It means there’s
too much extraneous detail.
How about this:
Dr. Payne paused in his running commentary on dental history and put down
his drill. “Did you know,” he remarked, “that the value of all the gold molars
in a city this size, at this afternoon’s spot price of gold, would be something
on the order of half a million dollars?” He picked up his drill again. “Open.”
If the detail serves the story, you can hardly have too much.

GIVE IT A MINI PLOT
It’s no accident that many great novels have first chapters that were excerpted in
magazines, where they essentially stood as short stories. I remember being
knocked to the floor by the gorgeous completeness of Ian McEwan’s first
chapter of On Chesil Beach when it was excerpted in The New Yorker.
Every chapter should have its own plot, none more important than Chapter
One. Use what you know about storytelling to:
Make trouble. I side with the writing gurus who advise you to put in a lot
of conflict early. Pick your trouble and make it big. If it can’t be big at first,
make it ominous.
Focus on action. Years ago I got a rejection that said, “Your characters are
terrific and I love the setting, but not enough happens.” A simple and useful

critique! Bring action forward in your story; get it going quick. This is why
agents and editors tell you to start your story in the middle: They’ve seen
too many Chapter Ones bogged down by backstory. Put your backstory in
the back, not the front. Readers will stick with you if you give them
something juicy right away. I make a point of opening each of my Rita
Farmer novels with a violent scene, which is then revealed to be an
audition, or a film shoot or a rehearsal. Right away, the reader gets
complexity, layers, and a surprise shift of frame of reference.
Be decisive. A good way to do that is to make a character take decisive
action.
Don’t telegraph too much; let action develop through the chapter. It’s
good to end Chapter One with some closure. Because it is Chapter One,
your readers will trust that the closure will turn out to be deliciously false.

BE BOLD
The most important thing to do when writing Chapter One is put your best
material out there. Do not humbly introduce your story—present it with a
flourish. Don’t hold back! Set your tone and own it. You’re going to write a
whole book using great material; have confidence that you can generate terrific
ideas for action and emotion whenever you want.
If you do your job creating a fabulous appetizer in Chapter One and follow it
up well, your readers will not only stay through the whole meal, they’ll order
dessert, coffee and maybe even a nightcap—and they won’t want to leave until
you have to throw them out at closing time.
ELIZABETH SIMS (elizabethsims.com) is a contributing editor for Writer’s Digest Magazine.
She’s the award-winning author of seven novels and many short stories, poems, and articles.

Chapter 14

STRENGTHEN YOUR SCENES
BY JAMES SCOTT BELL
In the English countryside they have stone walls to keep in the sheep. Some of
these walls have been around for centuries, and they’re amazing architectural
achievements. The flat stones are not uniform. They differ in color and shape,
yet they fit together to form the whole.
The scenes of your fiction are like the stones in an English wall. You want
your scenes to vary in shape and feel, but when you step back they should all fit
together. You don’t want any stones sticking out at odd angles or cracked
through the center.
If you make each scene stand on its own and contribute to the story in an
essential way, your story will be structurally solid.
But if you have weak scenes, your story may crumble.
Let’s look at some simple techniques for revising scenes so your edifice will
stand the test of time.

1. RELIVE YOUR SCENES, NOT REWRITE, RELIVE
Have you ever imagined yourself to be the characters? Tried to feel what they’re
feeling? Try it now. It’s not hard. Be an actor.
Often, after I’ve written a scene, I’ll go back and try to live the emotions. I’ll
act out the parts I’ve created. Almost always what I feel “in character” will make
me add to or change the scene.
You can also imagine the scene, step by step, in your mind. Let it play like a
movie. But instead of watching the movie from a seat in the theater, be in the
scene. The other characters can’t see you, but you can see and hear them.

Intensify the proceedings. Let things happen. Let characters improvise. If
you don’t like what they come up with, rewind the scene and allow them to do
something else.
Look at the beginnings of your scenes. What do you do to grab the reader at
the start? Have you spent too much time with description of setting? Often the
better course is to start in medias res (in the middle of things) and drop in
description a little later.
Examine scene endings. What have you provided that will make the reader
want to read on? Some great places to stop a scene are:
At the moment a major decision is to be made.
Just as a terrible thing happens.
With a portent of something bad about to happen.
With a strong display of emotion.
When raising a question that has no immediate answer.
Keep improving your scenes and your novel will soon develop that can’t-put-itdown feel.

2. HEAT UP THE CORE
Ask yourself what the core of your scene is. What’s the purpose? Why does it
exist? If the core is weak or unclear, strengthen it.

3. ADJUST YOUR PACE
If you need to speed up a scene, dialogue is one way to do it. Short exchanges
with few beats leave a lot of white space on the page and give a feeling of
movement.
In the Lawrence Block story “A Candle for the Bag Lady,” a waitress tells
private investigator Matt Scudder someone was looking for him, ending her
descriptions by saying he looked “underslung.”

“Perfectly good word.”
“I said you’d probably get here sooner or later.”
“I always do. Sooner or later.”
“Uh-huh. You okay, Matt?”
“The Mets lost a close one.”
“I heard it was 13-4.”
“That’s close for them these days. Did he say what it was about?”
To slow the pace of a scene, you can add action beats, thoughts and description
as well as elongated speeches. In the Block story, a killer confesses to Scudder.
Scudder asks why he did it.
“Same as the bourbon and coffee. Had to see. Had to taste it and find out
what it was like.” His eyes met mine. His were very large, hollow, empty. I
fancied I could see right through them to the blackness at the back of his
skull. “I couldn’t get my mind away from murder,” he said. His voice was
more sober now, the mocking playful quality gone from it. “I tried. I just
couldn’t do it. It was on my mind all the time and I was afraid of what I
might do. I couldn’t function, I couldn’t think, I just saw blood and death all
the time. I was afraid to close my eyes for fear of what I might see. I would
just stay up, days it seemed, and then I’d be tired enough to pass out the
minute I closed my eyes. I stopped eating. I used to be fairly heavy and the
weight just fell off of me.”

4. STRETCH THE TENSION
Don’t waste any good tension beats. Stretch them. Make your prose the
equivalent of slow motion in a movie.
Show every beat, using all the tools at your disposal: thoughts, actions,
dialogue, description. Mix these up.
In a famous early scene in Whispers, Dean Koontz takes 17 pages to describe
the attempted rape of the lead character. Read it and learn.

Avoid Muddy Viewpoints
Each scene needs to have a clear point-of-view character. The rule is one POV per scene.
No “head hopping.” The exception is when you’re using omniscient POV, which has its own
challenges. Otherwise stick with one.
Go over your scenes and see if, within the first couple of paragraphs, the viewpoint is
clear. If not, you can quickly remedy the situation. Instead of starting a scene this way:
The room was stuffy and packed with people.
Do it like this:
Steve walked into the stuffy room and tried to get past the mass of people.
Throughout the scene, you may need to remind us whose head we’re in. You can do this with
little clues, such as “Steve knew that he had to …” or “Steve felt the sweat under his arms …”

5. CUT OR STRENGTHEN WEAK SCENES
Identify the ten weakest scenes in your work. You should have an idea of what
these are. Use your gut instinct.
When you read through the manuscript, you sensed a certain letdown in
some of the scenes or even outright disappointment.
To help you further, look for scenes where:
Characters do a lot of talking to each other, without much conflict.
The scene feels like a setup for some other scene.
The characters’ motivations seem undeveloped.
There’s too much introspection going on.
There’s not enough introspection to explain the motivations in action.
There’s little tension or conflict between characters.
There’s little tension or conflict inside the character.
Make yourself identify ten weak scenes. Even if you think only five are really
weak, rate another five. List the scenes in order of their relative weakness. The
weakest scene is No. 1, the next weakest No. 2, and so on.

Write these numbers on sticky notes and mark each weak scene in the
manuscript. Now you’re ready to work. Follow these steps:
Step 1: Cut scene 1 from the manuscript.
It’s gone. It is the weakest link. Good-bye.
Step 2: Move to scene 2. Answer the three ‘O’ questions.
1. What’s the objective in the scene and who holds it? In other words, who is
the POV character and what’s he after in the scene? If he’s not after
anything, give him something to go after, or cut the scene.
You must be able to state the character’s objective clearly and
unambiguously. You must also make this objective clear to the reader at the
beginning of the scene. The character must either state it or show it in
action.
2. Next, what’s the obstacle to his known objective? Why can’t he have it?
There are three primary obstacles you can use:
• Another character who opposes him, either consciously or
unconsciously.
• The character himself is fighting an inner battle or lack of something
that gets in his way.
• A physical circumstance makes it hard or impossible for him to gain
his objective.
3. Finally, what is the outcome of the scene? A character can gain his
objective or not. For the greatest tension, which do you think it should be?
Not. Why? Because trouble is your game, and trouble is tension for the
character, and that’s what keeps readers reading. Most of the time, let the
outcome be a negative—or at least an unrealized—objective.
Step 3: Repeat the above process for the other eight scenes on your list.

JAMES SCOTT BELL is a best-selling and award-winning suspense writer. He is the author of
Plot & Structure, Revision & Self-Editing and The Art of War for Writers.

Chapter 15

RESCUE YOUR STORY FROM PLOT PITFALLS
BY LAURA WHITCOMB
We’ve all been there, basking in the glow of a finished manuscript only to read it
over and realize something is wrong with the plot. Finding ourselves unable to
identify the problem only makes matters worse. But take heart! Here are some
common plot gaffes and sensible ways to revise without starting over.

1. THE PLOT ISN’T ORIGINAL ENOUGH
Go through your pages and highlight anything that you’ve read in another book
or seen in a movie. In the margin, write where you’ve seen it. Then list these
sections and make a note for each one about how it could differ from its lookalike. A mental patient escapes by throwing something heavy through a window.
Too much like One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest? Instead the patient walks out
with a visiting grandma after convincing her he’s an old friend. Quick notes like
these can help you detach from unintentional imitation.

2. READERS ALWAYS KNOW EXACTLY WHAT’S GOING TO
HAPPEN
This may be because you’ve chosen a plot point that’s overused or because you
keep giving away the answer in advance. Readers know the villain is going to
whip out a picture of the hero’s son and blackmail her by pretending to have
kidnapped the little boy because you showed the villain taking pictures of the
child and driving away from the school yard. You could be less obvious by only
showing the antagonist sitting in the car watching the boy on the playground and
no more.

3. THE PLOT IS BORING
Take each page and imagine what different writers might do with the same plot.
Choose extreme examples. Would a comedy writer have the cab driver and the
villain coincidentally be childhood friends with unfinished business? Would the
mystery writer have the taxi pass a clue on a street corner that makes a new
connection for the hero? Would the horror writer have the cab driver channel a
ghost? Imagine the most surprising thing that could happen in a given scene. It
doesn’t matter if these ideas don’t fit your story. You’re not going to use them.
But often, after thinking of wild ideas to make the story more interesting, you
begin to come up with workable ones that are just as stimulating but better suited
to your book.

4. THE PLOT IS ALL ACTION AND THE FRENZIED PACE
NUMBS READERS
Let them breathe. Give the readers a little downtime now and then in your action
story. Look back at your favorite action novels. Notice the conversations,
summarized passages, meals, introspection, and releases of emotions that are set
in between the car chases, shootouts and confrontations. List them. Then give
the readers a chance to breathe in your own manuscript. Find the dramatic
respites that come from your characters’ needs, flaws, and strengths.

5. THE PLOT IS TOO COMPLEX
Often a complex plot can be trimmed into a sleek one by cutting out some steps.
Does your protagonist have to visit her father in the hospital twice—once to
bring him flowers and talk about Mom, and then again to find he has taken a turn
for the worse? Couldn’t he take a turn for the worse while she’s still there the
first time? Does your villain need to have three motives for revenge? Would one
or two be interesting enough? To find the messiness in your overly complex
story, summarize it out loud to yourself. When a section takes too long to
explain, make a note. When you find yourself saying, “Oh, wait, I forgot to

mention that …” you’re probably in need of a plot trim. When deciding whether
or not to simplify the plot, ask yourself over and over again, “Why does she do
that? Why didn’t she just do this?” Making a plot less complicated doesn’t have
to make it less clever.

6. THE PLOT IS TOO SHALLOW
Sometimes as writers we get caught up in the action. The symbolism. The
metaphors. The witty dialogue. The great character names. The slick
descriptions. Sometimes we ride these skills over the surface of the story and
forget what’s really important. If you or your first readers (friends, family, agent)
complain that the novel feels insubstantial, step back and ask yourself these
questions: Why am I bothering to write this story? Why does the outcome matter
to the characters? How do the characters change? How did my favorite book
affect me the first time I read it?

7. SUSPENSION OF DISBELIEF IS DESTROYED
Readers need to buy into the reality put forward by what they’re reading. You
may go too far with a plot point or not far enough with preparing your audience
for that plot point. If something that sounded right when you outlined it is
coming off as far-fetched even to you, look back at the stepping-stones that led
to the event. If your murderer turns over a new leaf at the end of Act Two, make
sure you’ve given her reason to.

Shake Up Your Plot’s Rhythm
Your plot has an effect on the rhythm between your scenes, summary and reflection. If for the
first half of your book the protagonist is alone, there will be few dialogue scenes, lots of
detailed descriptions, and probably plenty of summary and reflection. If, on the other hand,
your whole novel takes place in a small boat where four people are trapped for a day, you’ll
probably have long scenes of dialogue.
To examine your plot’s rhythm, try one of these exercises:

1. List the scenes. List all your scenes, skipping a line between each. Then write down
whether there needs to be any transition between the scenes.
Can you just jump to the next scene? Then mark the scenes with a “Y” for “YES, I’m
absolutely positive this part should be written as a scene,” or an “M” for “MAYBE this needs to
be a scene, maybe I should rethink it and turn it into a summary or a passage of reflection.”
2. Compound scenes. Search your manuscript for scenes that can be combined. Here’s an
example: You write a scene where your protagonist argues with her husband as he’s leaving
for work, then you summarize her driving the kids to school, then include a scene where she
gets her feelings hurt by her son as she drops him off at the curb.
Maybe you could combine the things that need to happen in the story. The other car
won’t start so she’s got the kids and her husband squished into her car. She’s arguing with
the husband as she’s trying to drive and can’t pay attention to the children, who are trying to
get her attention.
As she pulls up to the school, her son hurts her feelings on purpose as he’s getting out of
the car. Lots going on. Not boring. And now the argument with the husband is tied to the child
hurting her feelings.
3. Scan your favorite book. Take a novel by your favorite writer, someone you would like to
emulate, and flip through the first fifty pages, jotting down the length, number, and order of
scenes, summaries, and passages of reflection. You might be surprised at what you learn.

8. TOO MANY SUBPLOTS MAKE THE PLOT OVERLY
COMPLEX
If you start to feel weighed down by your numerous story lines, start cutting
them. List the subplots (shopkeeper with a crush, neighbor’s dog that tears up the
garden, accountant who threatens to quit every day), and then list under each
title all the ways it’s necessary.
Only subplots that are so vital that you could not remove them without
destroying your novel get to stick around. Be bold.

9. THE SEQUENCE IS ILLOGICAL
Sometimes the sequence set down in an outline starts to show its true colors
when you’re writing the chapters. If you feel the order of scenes or events in
your story is off, list each scene on a separate index card and, in red ink, write a

question mark on every card that doesn’t feel right where it is in the story.
Shuffle the cards. I’m not kidding. Mix them up completely. Lay them out again
in the order you think they might work best, giving special attention to those
with red question marks.
Something about these scenes tricked you the first time. This time, really
look closely at the proper place for those tricky bits.

10. THE PREMISE ISN’T COMPELLING
If you fear that a mediocre premise is your holdup, take out a sheet of paper.
Make a list on the left-hand side of everything that’s dodgy in your present
premise. Then write a list down the right-hand side about all the things that work
great in the premise of a similar favorite book, play, or movie.
See where you might make the stakes higher, the characters more emotional,
the setting more a part of the overall plot. Remember: The premise should make
your readers curious.

11. THE CONCLUSION IS UNSATISFYING
Once again, write a list of what bothers you about your conclusion, and, next to
it, a list of what worked great about the end of your favorite novel. Do you have
to create more suspense before you give the readers what they’ve been craving?
Do you need to make the answer to the mystery clearer? Does the villain need to
be angrier, or perhaps show remorse? Unsatisfying conclusions are usually
lacking something. Whatever that is, make your story’s ending have more of it.
LAURA WHITCOMB is the author of two young adult novels and Novel Shortcuts: Ten
Techniques that Ensure a Great First Draft.

Focus on the Writing Life:
BEATING WRITER’S BLOCK

START ME UP
BY ELIZABETH SIMS
Let’s get something straight. If you were a Mini Cooper and somebody drove
you into a bog filled with axle-deep mud, you’d be stuck. If you were a halfback
and you dodged the wrong way, you would be blocked. If you were a mountain
huckleberry and somebody stewed you with pectin and countless other mountain
huckleberries, then sealed you under sterile conditions and lower-than-ambient
air pressure, you’d be jammed.
Luckily, you’re none of those things. You’re a writer of fiction. You don’t get
stuck, blocked, or jammed.
Yeah, right. I tell myself that, too. The truth is, the bogs and the blocks and
the slow stickies get everybody at some time. But after seven novels, I’ve
figured out ways to outwit them all—and have fun doing it.

THE RANDOM SENTENCE KICK START
If you can’t get even a word on the page, try this:
1. Go to your bookshelf, close your eyes, and pick off a book at random.
Fiction or not; doesn’t matter.
2. Open that book to a random page.
3. Open your eyes.
4. Read the first sentence you see.

5. Put the book back.
6. Now make that sentence the basis of what you write next.
Let’s say I want to begin a novel about a hot dog peddler who decides he ought
to have a trophy wife.
I close my eyes at my bookshelf and pick out The Portable Conrad. Flip
open to page 545, where my eye picks up this sentence from Heart of Darkness:
“It was not sleep—it seemed unnatural, like a state of trance.” All right, here’s
my beginning:
I hadn’t slept in a week, but it wasn’t even that. I knew she’d come and buy a
dog with mustard and a Diet Coke, no chips, on Friday. And I knew she’d
drop the money in my hand and take the dog with a nervous little shake, to
settle the dog better in the bun and settle the bun better in the foil. I’d been
waiting for her like a schooner waits for a trade wind, like a zombie waits for
a dish of brain curds. She came to buy a dog once a month, no more often,
because she was a model and had to watch her weight but she loved my
dogs. I saw her for two minutes on the second Friday of every month. I loved
her during those two minutes and all the minutes in between.
Well, I like it. I might keep it or throw it away, but at least it gets my story going,
and it’s fresh. I can use my protagonist’s insomnia again if I want to. He’s
revealed his personality and his problem, and now I can take him out for a beer
and get to know him better.

SPELUNKING THE SEWER WITHIN
When your writing feels heavy and effortful, chances are your imagination is
tired. Adding some nastiness can work wonders. I don’t mean you should change
your hero into a villain, but you must find and bring out dark nuances, which
horrify and fascinate us when we see them in others—and pretend not to see in
ourselves.

Think about something you did that was horrible and that you’re not sorry
for. That’s powerful stuff.
Write about it. Now think about something you did that was horrible and that
you’re ashamed of. There’s power there, too. Think about writing a story about
that shameful thing from a sympathetic point of view.
Were you the school bully? Probably not. But pretend you were. Write about
it. What made you mad? Whom did you hate? Why? What was your favorite
way to inflict pain on your victims? Were you ever sorry? Did you ever hurt
yourself?
Write answers to these questions, then go back to your fiction at hand. You’ll
immediately see opportunities for deepening your characters, and from that
you’ll see ways to add dynamic, direct action that moves your story forward.

THE CROSS-CULTURAL QUARREL
If your dialogue is falling flat, throw a couple of opposites together and make
them argue. This is so much fun and will jar you out of the deepest mental rut.
You can use your own characters if you’re in the middle of a novel or story. I
advise picking characters who may never meet: the suave drug dealer vs. the
passive-aggressive university professor; the neurotic movie star vs. her longdead idol. Why characters whose worlds don’t meet? Because things you’re not
expecting will come out of their mouths.
Give them a setting—climbing out of their cars after colliding with each
other, standing side by side in a police lineup, racing away from a mudslide,
sitting down on a curbstone with a pint of Jim Beam. Start an argument. You can
make one character demand something from the other, or you can make one of
them nosy about the other. Here are some starter questions:
What has just happened to you?
What are you going to do about it?
How do you think you can get away with that?

Who was the last person you kissed?
If your own characters are still feeling dull, try writing an argument between
someone else’s characters, especially characters from vastly different books. At
random: Brett Ashley vs. Hazel Motes, Zooey Glass vs. Tarzan, Count Vronsky
vs. Jean Brodie (ooh!); The Wife of Bath vs. Pantagruel; Easy Rawlins vs. Aunt
Polly.
As an example, I’ll throw my hot dog peddler, whom I’ve named Rich (a
little allegorical irony here), together with Jay Gatsby. Rich and Gatsby decide to
take up boxing. They go to a gym, put on some gloves, and start sparring. While
they jab and weave, they talk.
Rich: So, I’m thinking I’ll ask her out.
Gatsby: You don’t just ask her out, old sport. You have to prepare
yourself. You have to do things.
Rich: Well, I know. I’m going to get a haircut.
Gatsby: I’m talking about everything. You can’t just wave a wand and
become attractive to her. Now a fellow like me—
Rich: She’d never look twice at you.
Gatsby: Now, look here. Do you want my advice or don’t you? Your
jacket is greasy, your fingernails have ketchup under them, you don’t wear
any cologne, and you’re a high-school dropout. I’m sorry to be so honest.
But a woman wants to be—
Rich: I’m going to impress her by my actions.
Gatsby: So, who are you going to assassinate?
How does all this feel? Disheveled and a little silly? Good! That’s the point: to
get your brain to a place where your inner editor gives up and leaves. When you
get your writing going, keep it going. Press it. Be aggressive. When you stop,
you’ll feel confident about producing fresh work, because you’ll have just done
some.

ELIZABETH SIMS (elizabethsims.com) is a contributing editor for Writer’s Digest Magazine.
She’s the award-winning author of seven novels and many short stories, poems, and articles.

Part 3
POINT OF VIEW:
The Voice of Your Story

Chapter 16

UNDERSTANDING DIFFERENCES IN POV
BY JAMES V. SMITH JR.
There are, obviously, several different points of view available to you—and, less
obviously, several advantages and disadvantages to each.

FIRST PERSON
First person POV refers to the I, we, me, my, mine, us narrator, often the voice of
the heroic character or a constant companion of the heroic character.
There I was, minding my own beeswax when she up and kissed me. I near
passed out.
Advantages of this POV:
It feels natural to most writers because we live in an I world.
You have to deal with only one mind: the narrator’s.
You can create a distinctive internal voice.
You can add an element of craft by creating a narrator who is not entirely
reliable.
Disadvantages of this POV:
You are limited to writing about what the narrator can see or sense.
The narrator must constantly be on stage or observing the stage.
You can’t go into the minds of other characters.

SECOND PERSON

The you narrator, this POV is rarely successful, and even then works best in
shorter books. For an example of second-person POV, check out Jay
McInerney’s Bright Lights, Big City. But know that most publishing
professionals advise against using this tricky approach.
You’re just standing there. She comes along and kisses you, and you nearly
faint.
Advantages of this POV:
It gives you the power to be different, even eccentric in the way you can
speak to the reader so directly.
Disadvantages of this POV:
It begins to feel quirky, whether you’re reading it or writing it.
It can say to a publishing professional: “I’m a Jay McInerney knockoff.
Reject me!”

THIRD PERSON
The he, she, it, they, them narrator, third person is the most common POV in
fiction. It offers a variety of possibilities for limiting omniscience: information
that the narrator and reader are privy to in the telling of the story.
Third Person Unlimited Omniscience
In this POV, the author enters the mind of any character to transport readers to
any setting or action.
He stood stiff as a fence post, watching her come his way. What did she
want? he wondered.
She had decided to kiss him, no matter what. So she did. She could see
the effect of her kiss at once. He nearly fell over.
Advantages of this POV:

It can enrich your novel with contrasting viewpoints.
Both you and your reader can take a breath of fresh air as you shift from
one character’s POV to another’s.
You can broaden the scope of your story as you move between settings and
from conflicting points of view.
Disadvantages of this POV:
You can confuse yourself and the reader unless every voice is distinctive.
You can diffuse the flow of your story by switching the POV too often.
(Notice how the last passage about the kiss jolts you from one POV to the
other.)
It’s easy to get lazy and begin narrating as the author instead of as one of
your characters.
Third-Person Limited Omniscience
The author enters the mind of just a few characters, usually one per chapter
or scene.
He stood stiff as a fence post, watching her come his way.
What did she want? he wondered, as she approached. Then he saw the
determination in her face. Good crackers! She was going to kiss him, no
matter what.
She did, too, and he nearly fell over.
Advantages of this POV:
It has all the advantages of third person unlimited POV.
You can concentrate the story by keeping to major characters’ (and strategic
minor characters’) thoughts.
Disadvantages of this POV:

There aren’t any, really; by imposing POV discipline,you minimize the
downsides of unlimited omniscience.
If you want to get really complex, you can identify three or four times as many
POV choices—but these are by far the most common, and will suit most any
story.
JAMES V. SMITH JR. is author of five novels in the military action genre and You Can Write a
Novel, 2nd Edition and The Writer’s Little Helper. He is the editor, chief photographer, and writer
for Rural Montana magazine.

Don’t Let Your Authorial Overshadow Your Character’s Voice
The most effective writing—regardless of POV—lets the reader see things through the eyes
of the characters instead of the eyes of the author or omniscient narrator.
He was tall, 6 foot 2, with a nose to match, tall, thin, and straight.
That’s the author talking.
He caught sight of his 6-foot-2 reflection in the window of a bagel shop, paused and
studied his thin, straight nose, both in profile and straight on. Straight on, he
decided, always show your nose to her straight on. Never from the side.
This approach provides the same facts without stopping the story as if to say, “I’m going to
describe somebody now.” We see the reflection through the character’s eyes, not the author’s
keyboard. We see action, both actual and implied. Plus, we learn something about the
character’s personality. He’s vain about the nose.
Here’s another example of seeing through a character’s eyes. In this brief scene only the
characters do the talking.
“You’ve got a stiff neck or something?” she asked.
“No–why?”
“You keep turning your body instead of your head when you look at me.”
The characters describe the action to each other; it’s entirely between quote marks. The
author stays out of the picture and lets the characters react to each other and to events. You
do your best writing when the people in the story make things happen. Naturally there’s
nothing wrong with narration. But when you reveal information this way, nobody, neither an
author nor a narrator, interprets for the reader. Instead the reader interprets on her own.

Here is one final example of seeing a scene through a character’s eyes:
… the guy staring up at the center of my face makes me wonder if my fine, straight nose is
going to leave the party in the condition it crashed the party. He’s a full foot shorter than me, 5
feet and change, thighs like fireplugs, a chest like a beer keg, a pony keg stacked on top for a
head—no neck.

Here the first-person narrator is described by creating the image of somebody else and
showing the contrast. We learn that the narrator is 6 feet tall, plus change. He wonders
whether his fine, straight nose will be broken. It’s the same height and nose we saw in the
window, by the way. This technique shows us an image of the narrator without actually letting
on that we’re describing him.

Chapter 17

USING PERCEPTION TO ENHANCE YOUR POV
BY ALICIA RASLEY
Once you’ve chosen a primary POV character, you need to get to know her from
the inside out. Keep in mind that readers want an experience, not just a view.
They want to see the story through that character’s eyes.
In order to create an authentic narrative voice, begin by asking yourself some
key questions about your POV character: How does this person perceive the
world? How does she come to understand her environment? What does she
choose to notice and to ignore, and why? What does she want to do with what
she learns?
In addition to defining your character’s emotional and intellectual
dimensions, POV reflects perceptual ability, which varies depending on a
person’s sensory and cognitive skills—the way we take in and use information.

PERCEPTION AND POINT OF VIEW
Most of us have one or two dominant senses. For example, I’m an auditory, not
visual, person. I can see you every workday, and I can’t describe you. But after a
couple of phone conversations, I can recognize a voice anywhere. So as a POV
character, I would not note my future love interest’s looks, beyond a vague
realization that he’s gorgeous. But his sardonic tone, the nervous catch in his
voice as he greets me, the deliberate pace of his speech—these I would take note
of.
Think about your own perceptual strengths and weaknesses. Which of the
five basic senses is strongest for you? Can you actually taste the difference
between Pepsi and Coke? Can you distinguish the perfumes of every woman in

the room? Can you tell just by the tone of a friend’s voice how she’s feeling? Do
you love to touch different fabrics? Are you overly sensitive to color, to the point
that you’re unable to work in a yellow room?
Now apply the same sort of questions to a character, and you’ll start to
individualize her POV. Identify her dominant sense, and then think about how
that will affect how she narrates a scene. A visual person will focus more on
what she sees: She was so intent on that garbage truck backing up that she
missed what Judy said. A tactile person will always be touching things and
reporting on the texture: Betty grabbed the doorknob. The brass was cool and
smooth under her hand, and it wouldn’t turn. A little of this goes a long way, but
even a few focused sensory references can convey how this character takes in
the world around her.

THE VARIOUS MODES OF PERCEPTION
Sensual perceptivity is not the only way to “absorb” the world. There’s also
temperament (optimist/pessimist, emotional/rational) and personality style
(problem solver, logician, competitor, and so on). Learning style also affects
perception. You’ll notice that schools these days tend to offer different methods
of instruction because they recognize that children have different learning
strengths. For example, a teacher will provide an assignment sheet but also read
it aloud in class, so that both visual and auditory learners will understand it.
Visual people learn more through their eyes; they have good visual memory,
are intrigued by color and motion, and will watch a video to learn how to build a
bookcase. Kinesthetic learners need to participate in the lesson.
Think about how your character learned (or didn’t learn) in school. And
consider the character’s profession, for we usually choose to do what we are
naturally attuned to. Artists tend to perceive the world through their most
developed sense, which will probably be the one they use in their art. An
engineer will try to understand the logic, the structure, of what he’s perceiving. A

lawyer is a negotiator and a talker, and she’ll acquire knowledge mostly through
questioning and listening.
There’s also a less obvious perceptive mode—a sixth sense—we call
intuition. It’s probably a combination of superior emotional intelligence and
hypersensitivity to external stimuli, but what it means is that you can sense the
emotion, intent, and fears of others. You can figure out if they’re telling the truth
or lying, if they’re trustworthy or not. This is a wonderful “extra” sense to
bestow upon certain types of characters, like cops and journalists, who have to
make quick judgments. To display this sense in POV, imagine how it feels to
know something instinctively, and show it that way. For example, a character’s
stomach might knot up, or the nerves in his arms might go on alert, when
someone intends harm.

PERCEPTION AS A PARTY GAME
Now consider how these ways of perceiving will be exhibited in the narrative.
Imagine a group of characters with lots of different perceptual abilities arriving
at a raucous party and having to make sense of the chaos.
A problem solver sees the world as a set of problems to be solved. She will
walk into a party and notice what’s wrong—the music is too loud, the ice has run
out, and a girl is sitting alone in the corner crying. Though the problem solver
focuses on problems, she’s no pessimist; rather, she’s busy devising solutions—
turning down the stereo, sending her boyfriend into the kitchen for more ice, and
comforting the weeper.
A competitor sees life as a game. When he enters the party, he will choose a
side—that weeping girl has already been cut from his team—then scout the
opposition and ascertain the prize. He likes to know the rules ahead of time, and
he expects a fair outcome: The swift ought to win the race, and he ought to get
the most beautiful woman.
A materialist will scan the crowd and see diamonds and Rolex watches,
calculating the net worth of the party and never noticing the human tragedy in

the corner.
These are examples of only a few perception types. You’ll come up with
more on your own. Just remember, less is more. Few people are both visually
and auditorily superior, and logical besides. So instead of using all five senses in
a scene, consider that the more evocative viewpoint will have one dominant
perception. A musical hero would close his eyes to better hear the song of his
lover’s sighs—and never even see the fire in her eyes.

HOW PERCEPTION CAN CHANGE A SCENE
Use your knowledge of the POV character’s perspective modes to make his
narration of every event unique to him. This contributes to the authenticity of the
scene, strengthens a reader’s investment in the story, and reveals character. Here
are some examples of how perception might affect a POV character’s experience
of the scene and what details you choose to reveal about him.
A deliberate, judicious character will think before speaking, so you’ll likely
show that thinking:
Thomas waited until they were alone. He chose his words carefully, knowing
the wrong word could mean beheading. “I would not want to offend Your
Grace, but his wife—it is said in the kitchens, mere rumor, perhaps, that she
is spending more time with the stable boy than perhaps most ladies of her
station would do.”
He waited for the duke’s response, and when there was none except for
that cold stare, Thomas realized it was not time for further revelation.
An impulsive person’s thoughts will be chaotic and action oriented, and often the
action will come first and the thought after:
Thomas took the duke’s arm and pulled him toward the window. “Come and
see this. You’ll want to see it.” Well, he reflected, His Grace might not
actually want to see it, but a cuckolded man deserved to know the truth.

He didn’t see it coming, but he felt it—the duke’s glove. Fist enclosed. As he
went down, he thought, Kill the messenger, why don’t you? And then he didn’t
think anymore.
A pessimistic person’s thoughts will prophesize doom:
Thomas watched the hard-faced duke enter and cross to the back window.
Oh, woe. The duke would see his wife and the stable boy, right out there in
the stable yard. There was no avoiding it. He didn’t even bother to try to
divert the duke’s attention—what good would it do? No matter what, he
would get blamed for it. It was his job around here. Whipping boy.
An optimist’s POV will show an expectation of the best:
Thomas watched the duke enter and cross to the window. That could be
trouble. Then again, maybe it was for the best. Maybe the duke would see
how unhappy his wife was, take pains to win her back, and give her the child
she wanted so badly. Then the old castle would ring with the joyous sound of
laughter and childish voices!
Same situation, same role—but a different type of character in each POV. It’s not
just the action that shifts with the change in character, but the very narration of
that action—the word choice, the attitude, the sentence construction, the
perception, the value system (the first Thomas values his position; the next
values the truth; the next values his martyrdom; the final values babies and
marital harmony), the analysis of what’s going on, and the level of connection to
reality.
ALICIA RASLEY is a Rita-award-winning author. She is the author of The Power of Point of View:
Make Your Story Come to Life.

Individualzing Your Character’s POV

Look at your own POV character—the readers’ eyes and ears in the story—and answer
whichever of these questions intrigue you. (You in the questions refers to the character.)
Freewrite the answers in the character’s first-person voice:
1. How do you learn best? Observation? Participation? Trial and error? Rumination
and cogitation? Consulting experts? Writing?
2. How open are you to new ideas and information? Do you change your mind
frequently, based on what people have told you? Are you a traditionalist, deciding
on the basis of what’s always been?
3. When you walk into a party, what do you notice first? The mood? The people? The
decorations? The things that need to be fixed? The background music? The food
on the buffet table? Whether or not you fit in?
4. Is one sense more highly developed than another? For instance, do you tend to
take in the world primarily through vision? (“I’ll believe that when I see it!”) Or are
you more auditory? Do you determine if a person is lying by the tone of voice?
What about the sixth sense—intuition? How often do you rely on your “gut” and
then have your feelings confirmed?
5. Do you usually notice problems around you? What is your response? Do you write
an angry letter to the editor? Shrug and move on? Analyze what’s wrong and how
to fix it? Take it as evidence that the world is falling apart? What about problems
within yourself?
6. Would you say you are an optimist or a pessimist? Would your friends agree?
7. Are you more interested in the past, the future, or living in the now? Are you one to
keep holiday traditions? If you had to move tomorrow, how long would it take you
to make new friends?
8. How do you decide if you can trust someone? By experience with this person?
First impressions? Intuition? Do you test the person somehow? Or are you
generally disposed to trust or not to trust?
9. Are you a deliberate, careful speaker, or do you talk without thinking first? Do you
use slang, or do you use the diction your old English teacher would approve of?

Chapter 18

POV CHARACTERS WHO OVERSTEP THEIR BOUNDS
BY KRISTEN JOHNSON INGRAM
Good writing streams from beginning to end without reminding readers of your
construction. But both beginners and seasoned writers sometimes sabotage that
flow when they allow in a writer’s nemesis—The Viewpoint Intruder.
When you constantly reinsert the POV character into the narrative, you make
readers feel as if they keep going back to the start. Read the following two
examples of the same scene to see what I mean:
Sally sits at a table in the restaurant, hoping her boyfriend, Jeremy, won’t be
late again. She notices the waiter looks tired. She turns to see a pair of
Japanese men talking quietly in a booth near the corner. She watches as a
baby in a high chair flings a spoonful of rice onto the carpet and sees the
waiter sigh.
Sally sits at a table in the restaurant, hoping her boyfriend, Jeremy, won’t
be late again. The waiter looks tired. A pair of Japanese men talk quietly in a
booth near the corner. A baby in a high chair flings a spoonful of rice onto
the carpet, and the waiter sighs.
When you allow viewpoint intrusion—letting Sally see the waiter and notice the
baby—you haven’t moved the reader into the story; you’ve diverted the narrative
and shown the reader that someone is writing. Remember, it’s understood that
once you’re in a character’s viewpoint, you stay there until the end of the scene,
and there’s no need to place her in every sentence. With that in mind, here’s how
to find and eliminate The Viewpoint Intruder.

TAKING NOTICE
The word that opens the door to viewpoint intrusion most often is “noticed.”
Recently I read a student manuscript that said:
The others were laughing and talking as they sat down at the table. As Kirk
reached across the table for the bread, he noticed his hands. His fingers were
long and brown, and he noticed how the light gleamed on his wedding ring.
The writer has inserted not one, but two intrusive “notices.” He noticed his
hands and noticed the gleam on his wedding ring. Was that the first time in his
life Kirk realized he had hands? The scene would be smoother if she wrote it
more like this:
Kirk reached across the table for the bread. His fingers were long and brown,
and light gleamed on his wedding ring.
The Viewpoint Intruder doesn’t attack only fiction. Here’s another example, this
one from an essay:
I looked over at Jenny propped up on the hospital bed. I could see her bright
smile, but I knew she was in pain.
“I looked” and “I could see” are both unnecessary intrusions (and we might even
include “I knew”). The POV character had been in the hospital room for some
time, thinking about Jenny’s circumstances. So all she needed was, “Jenny was
propped up in the bed. She was smiling, but I knew she was in pain.” Or even,
“Jenny was propped up in the bed, smiling in spite of her pain.”

SENSORY OVERLOAD
When you write about sensory impressions, the Intruder might try to take over
the text. Look at this example:

Rob opened the door. He could smell fried chicken and onions, and he heard
the butter crackling in the skillet. His mouth watered from hunger.
Rob’s senses are great in the narrative, but you can use them better by implying,
not reminding us of, his presence until you need it:
Rob opened the door. The aroma of fried chicken crackling in the skillet with
onion made his mouth water.
This way you begin and end with Rob, but you take him out of the description.

MEMORY LANE
When writers allow their characters to remember the past, Viewpoint Intruders
can run rampant. To catch them, be on the lookout for adverbial phrases. For
example: “As I stopped in front of the old house, my mind reeled back to how
hard it rained the day Jim shot me.” That passage would be stronger as, “I
stopped in front of the old house. Rain had fallen in torrents on the day Jim shot
me.” This passage has more zip and we don’t notice the author creeping around
in the bushes near the old house.
Avoid the phrase “I remember” whenever possible:
I remember that when I was five, I used to hide from my father in the linen
closet. I crawled under an old quilt on the floor, and I could hear his angry
footsteps.
This passage has some good elements in it. But if you take out “I remember,”
you have a stronger scene:
When I was five, I used to hide under an old quilt in the linen closet,
listening to my father’s angry footsteps.
We don’t have to see inside her head with every move or sound.

IT DOESN’T STOP HERE

Don’t assume you ever outgrow the tendency to intrude. The first draft of my
twentieth book, Beyond Words, was full of intrusions:
I took a break at a retreat in northern Idaho. I walked outside and sat on a
log, where I watched a fat honeybee roving around a big blue pasqueflower. I
could see her tasting its petals, and I heard her buzzing around the opening.
As I watched, she drew back and literally hurled herself at the flower’s
center.
After recognizing the intrusions, I edited it down.
During an afternoon break at a retreat in northern Idaho, I sat on a log and
watched a fat honeybee roving around a big blue pasqueflower. She tasted its
petals, snuffled at the opening, and then drew back and hurled herself at the
flower’s center.
That second version uses stronger verbs, and I’ve also eliminated my first-person
viewpoint intrusions.
You may continue to write with Viewpoint Intruders, but with practice,
you’ll be able to weed them out.
KRISTEN JOHNSON INGRAM is the author of twenty-two books, including two murder mysteries
and Making Peace With a Dangerous God. She’s also an instructor for
WritersOnlineWorkshops.com.

Chapter 19

MASTERING MULTIPLE POINTS OF VIEW
BY SIMON WOOD
Weaving multiple viewpoint characters in and out of a story is like standing trial
and knowing what the judge, the prosecuting attorney and all twelve members of
the jury are thinking. Each person is witnessing the same information, but his
interpretation is different. But it’s not like you can crack into everyone’s mind
simultaneously. Even if you could, it’d be impossible to comprehend what
fourteen people are saying if they’re all talking at the same time. Just visit your
average kindergarten classroom.
Allowing multiple characters to tell your story can provide insight that a
first-person POV may not be able to convey. Most stories have plenty of
characters with their own tales to tell. Multiple POV characters add depth to a
novel. Suddenly the story is being told from the perspective of multiple
witnesses, all putting their distinctive interpretations on events. But the inclusion
of multiple voices can bring with it its own problems. Those multiple points of
view can get out of control and turn the story into a mess. In a novel, just like in
a conversation, not everyone can speak at once. There are plenty of ways to give
each character a voice without having them talk over one another.

1. USE CHAPTER AND/OR SCENE BREAKS
Scene breaks are an effective literary device. They allow you to draw a line
between where one POV character leaves and another enters, which gives the
reader a clear indication that something has changed. Let’s say a chapter or scene
is told from the perspective of one character. The reaction to this chapter or
scene would have the most impact if it were told from a different character’s

point of view. To suddenly switch from one character’s point of view to
another’s could jerk the reader from the story, but a chapter or scene break would
be the perfect signal to the reader to let her know something has changed.
For example: With a heavy heart, POV character Molly tells David on his
twenty-first birthday that she adopted him as a baby. The chapter ends on this
bombshell, and the next chapter begins with David’s POV and his reaction to
this revelation.

2. CHANGE SPACES
As simple as it would be to break for a new chapter or scene every time you
wish to switch from one character’s point of view to another, it may not be
convenient to do so. The story could end up as a series of short scenes and
chapters, possibly making the flow of the story choppy. Additionally, a chapter
and/or scene break might kill the tension you’ve just built. So instead of
breaking for a new chapter or scene, change the scene’s location for the next
point of view. This can be as simple as having the characters switch to another
room.
Returning to the previous example with Molly and David, instead of having
a chapter break when Molly tells David that he’s adopted, you could switch
locations. David reacts violently to Molly’s news and storms out of the house,
leaving Molly behind. David is alone and in a new locale when his POV scene
kicks in. Although there’s been no physical break in the narrative, the reader is
fully aware that the point of view has switched to David.

3. PASS THE BATON
Another way of switching points of view seamlessly is to take the relay
approach, where one POV character hands over the baton to another. This is
achieved by using a pivotal point in the scene as a tool to hand over the POV.
Consider a scene where two POV characters are on the phone. While the
characters are speaking, keep the scene restricted to one POV character, but

when the call ends, switch to the other character’s POV.
Alternatively, use a setup in dialogue to pave the way for a POV change.
Consider the following example. A POV character says, “What’s your take on
this, Bob?” This is an open invitation to switch the POV to Bob’s character and
take the story in a new direction.

4. MIX PERSPECTIVES
We’re talking about managing multiple points of view, but which perspective do
you incorporate? You aren’t condemned to use multiple third-person
perspectives for your POV characters. Using a mix of first, second, and/or third
person makes for a clear change of POV.
Several authors have used this technique to their advantage. In Harlan
Coben’s Gone for Good, all the scenes featuring the protagonist’s POV are in
first person, while all the other POV characters are in third person for their
scenes. It makes for a unique style and makes it impossible to confuse POV
characters. The first-person narrative brings the reader closer to the protagonist,
and the third-person perspective keeps the reader at arm’s length from the other
characters.
This same approach can also be applied to experimentation with present and
past tense for POV characters, although it’s risky. In Michael Gruber’s Tropic of
Night, the story is told in third person, past tense, except for a character in
hiding. That character’s POV scenes are told in first person, present tense, in
journal fashion.

5. USE DISTINCTIVE VOICES
POV characters must possess their own distinct voices. If all the characters have
the same way of describing and seeing the world, then there’s a danger the
reader won’t be able to distinguish the differences between them. To ensure your
POV characters don’t all sound like the same person, you need to remember
what kind of people your characters are. A teenager’s view of the world is going

to be much different than that of a senior citizen’s. There are going to be cultural
differences between someone from the United States vs. someone from Somalia.
And how many books are there written about the differences between men and
women?
Nick Hornby demonstrates very well how to make his POV characters sound
different in A Long Way Down. The story is told from four first-person POV
characters (potentially a reader’s nightmare), but the four characters are very
different people—one is an angst-ridden teenager, one is a middle-aged woman
with a handicapped child, one is a disgraced TV personality, and the fourth is a
failed musician now delivering pizzas. The language, belief systems, and
outlooks on life of these four POV characters are so different that they never blur
into one another. The reader is at no time confused about which character is
speaking to him.

6. PICK THE RIGHT CHARACTER FOR THE RIGHT JOB
It’s not impossible to have several POV characters from your novel end up in the
same scene together. So who should tell the story of this scene—the protagonist,
the antagonist, a secondary character, or all of them? You need to step warily.
Switching from one character’s point of view to another’s throughout a scene
can be annoying to read. While all POV characters might have something to say,
there’s a danger of creating a “too many cooks in the kitchen” scenario. You
have to choose one POV character to narrate the scene—then stick to it. This
doesn’t have to default to the protagonist. Who at this particular juncture of the
story is the best storyteller or witness? You need to choose the character that will
give the reader the best report or unique perspective on the situation at hand.
Return for a moment to Molly and David. Molly’s POV is used to tell David
of his adoption, and the POV switches to David when he learns of the news. In
this scenario, the reader first feels the mother’s anguish over telling her son, then
the son’s shock that his mother kept this information from him for so long.

The points of view could have been reversed for totally different results. This
would’ve put a different spin on events. Instead we’d hear from David’s
perspective first. It’s his birthday, and he’s intrigued by Molly’s urgent need to
talk to him. Then Molly tells him he’s adopted. In the next scene, David has run
off, and the perspective is Molly’s. She’s torn up by David’s reaction and wishes
she’d gone after him. The story now takes on a different complexion. It’s not that
either arrangement is wrong. It’s up to you to decide which scenario works best
for the story.

7. CREATE A HIERARCHY OF POV CHARACTERS
A key question you must decide at the outset of the story is: Who are your
storytellers? If you decide there will be three, seven or a dozen POV characters,
you must also decide how much page time will be apportioned to each of these
characters. This may not seem important, but it is. The protagonist is the primary
storyteller in any story, so it stands to reason that the majority of the POV scenes
should belong to him. If not, there’s a danger that the protagonist will be
swallowed up by the wealth of other characters exerting their view on the story.
If you’re writing a crime thriller with the investigating officer as the
protagonist, the story should revolve around the officer and his investigation.
The investigating officer’s mark on the story might pale into insignificance if his
voice is drowned out by the voices of the suspect under investigation and the
other investigating officers.
So you need to allocate page time accordingly. The protagonist is the lead
character and should get the lion’s share, followed by the amount of time we
hear from the antagonist, then the secondary characters. Minor characters are
supposed to be heard from in the minority, while bit players should be seen and
not heard.
When it comes to page time, you need to think of it in terms of billings. The
readers will want to hear the most from the character that receives top billing.
She’s the star of the show, after all.

8. LIMIT THE NUMBER OF POV CHARACTERS
The key to managing multiple POV characters is selection. While it’s fun to
write from multiple characters’ perspectives, choose wisely. You need to decide
exactly how many storytellers are needed to tell the story. Don’t keep creating
POV characters just for the sake of it. The reader doesn’t have to hear from
every character. A minor player with just a glancing blow to the story doesn’t
need to leave his mark on the novel. You need to take an objective look at your
planned POV characters, decide whether all are needed, and eliminate
unnecessary voices from the story. Remember: Keep it poignant and relevant.
Managing multiple POV characters is a tough act but don’t make it a
juggling act. By making clear switches from one POV character to another and
creating a hierarchy of key storytellers with distinctive voices, you can create a
multifaceted story that no one will forget.
SIMON WOOD is an Anthony Award–winning thriller writer, including The Fall Guy and Did Not
Finish.

Focus on the Writing Life:
USING YOUR MUSE

MAKE YOUR OWN MUSE
BY N.M. KELBY
There’s a lot of talk about this muse thing. You can take an entire weekend
workshop about coaxing your muse, or flirting with your muse, or dancing with
your muse, or just spending time getting to know your muse better. It’s as if a
muse is some sort of Chia Pet: All you have to do is water her and the next thing
you know, you’re Norman Mailer.
It’s understandable where all this muse-centric chat comes from. There are
times when you’re writing and your hands type faster than your brain can even
think. One moment you’ve just had breakfast and the next the cat is screaming
for dinner. And how many times have you looked at what you’ve written and
thought, Who came up with that? I’m not that smart.
If those moments make you wonder if there’s some sort of otherworldly
creature inhabiting your body that is smarter and more profound than you are,
you’re not alone. The Greek poet Hesiod (799 B.C.) was the first writer to begin
this practice of muse worship and is given credit for naming them. The idea of
the muse took hold in 1374 when the English poet Geoffrey Chaucer evoked
them and destined all English poets to do the same forevermore.
The word muse comes from the Latin musa, which is derived from the Greek
mousa and is a term given the sisterhood of goddesses born of Zeus and
Mnemosyne. It’s their job to inspire.

Having a muse makes sense. Fiction is a magical art. Writers craft
paradoxical empires of logic and beauty and the reader lives within them, or at
least it feels as if they do, and they do this through the simple act of
interpretation—the puzzling out of an assortment of symbols on a page. Yet in
their minds the characters are as real to them as that bowlegged man who walks
his nervous dog past their house every evening. How is that not magic?
But waiting for a spirit to inspire you to sit down and write may not be the
most prudent course; you could wait for a long time.
If you do sit down and still feel stuck, you could cruise the Internet for
inspiration, but that often leads to shopping, blogging, and generalized goofing
off.
If you want to catch the muse, you have to court it.
It’s better to let your mind wander in a directed way. You can make yourself
a set a flashcards with images you take from magazines, photographs, or
postcards, or with evocative phrases like “The language they spoke was
iridescent,” or “He had eyes darker than any night.” Or thumb through your old
journals, picking up on ideas you made note of long ago. Or take a walk. Or pick
up your guitar and play until the words of a song become secondary to the
emotion of it.
Let the world at large be your muse. Be unafraid to walk aimlessly through a
city’s street at night, through unknown neighborhoods, and search for that part of
yourself that is lost there. Embrace the world’s sorrow. Linger in the silence of a
moment. Learn the language of your own heart.
Don’t wait for anything to guide your work. Dig deep inside of yourself. You
are the collective memory of your culture. You hold history in your hand. Never
ask for permission to write. Just take it. As Charles Simic said, “He who cannot
howl will not find his pack.” You have to howl until you are heard.
Embrace your muse as the spirit of life that passes through you—and there
will be times that something larger than yourself will inspire you, amaze you,
and overwhelm you with inspiration. But those moments are few and far

between, and you must be ready for them. You must show up for work, put in
your time, always have your heart open and your hand outstretched towards the
heavens.
But, whatever you do, never confuse those moments of brilliance on the page
with the idea that you are brilliant. That’s dangerous. It leads to destructive
behavior. As does the idea that you are failed as a writer—if you’ve done your
part to succeed, maybe your muse was just having an off day.
Elizabeth Gilbert gave a talk about the idea of genius on TED.com. Gilbert’s
“genius” could also be called the muse, as she defines it as a disembodied spirit
that enters artists and allows them to create work that is seemingly divine.
At one point in her lecture, she spoke about the sacred dances in North
Africa that went on centuries ago. People would gather in the moonlight, and the
dancers, filled with a sense of ecstasy, would dance into the morning. And every
now and then one of them would suddenly be filled with this sense of the
otherworldly. He would become transcendent. Even though he was doing the
same dance he’d done a thousand times before, time stopped, and it suddenly
seemed as if he’d stepped through a portal.
“He seemed to be lit from within and lit from below and lit up on fire with
divinity,” she said. “And when this happened … people knew it for what it was.
Allah! Allah! Allah! They would start to chant. That’s God.
“… when the Moors invaded Spain they took this custom with them.
However, it changed from over the centuries from Allah! Allah! Allah! to Ole!
Ole! Ole!, which is still heard at bullfights.”
When you write, you sit in your office and bang away hoping for brilliance,
hoping that your genius, your muse, your Allah, comes to you and elevates your
work. But you can’t wait for it. You have to be there ready to catch it, even on
days when it doesn’t seem worth the effort of getting out of bed.
Never give up.
N.M. KELBY is the author of The Constant Art of Being a Writer. Her story “Jubilation, Florida”
was selected for NPR’s “Selected Shorts.

FUELING YOUR MUSE WITH COMPOST
BY HEATHER SELLERS
Compost was something I mentioned on the first day of class one year, in
passing.
Now I talk about compost a lot. On the first day of a class, I have all my
students write three questions for me—anything they want to know—on index
cards. Then, I draw the cards at random, a few at a time for a few weeks, and I
answer. They ask me about my husband, children, my mother, my dogs. They
ask me how much I write, and why, and if they should be writers. They ask me
which books are my favorites. And if the dress I was wearing on the first day is
reversible, where I went to school, how many drafts I do, if I have done drugs.
They ask me to reveal a dream.
Most often they ask: Where do you get your ideas? Writers don’t so much
have ideas, I tell them. Some writers have ideas. Their books are important and
good—Coetzee has ideas, Gordimer has ideas, Sartre, and Murdoch, too. But
really, for most of us, the writing life is more like the sex life.
It’s an urge, and it has a certain dampness to it. It’s a desire, a thing you look
at from the side, not directly staring. The writing is gentle and fragile—nothing
like an idea which is sturdy and forceful and clear.
You don’t want to just stare, gaping, at a beautiful, lovely person. You try to
act cool. A little not-needy. This is how the writer relates to her material. She
doesn’t really get ideas for writing. Writing is more of a pulse, a throb, a thrum.
It feels more like desire and less like thinking.
It’s something you feed, this desire.
Here’s how: Finding your material is just like maintaining a compost pile.
Slowly, over years, you take your best stuff out to a secret, hidden away
place in the backyard, and you dump it there. You cover the pile. You can buy

things to help digest it (therapy, self-help books, and art classes equal worms,
enzymes, wood ash). But it will digest on its own, too. Without any intervention
from you at all.
All my students come to me with a compost pile. If they are young, say
eighteen, their compost pile might be fairly small and compact, though rich.
What is vital to learn early in the writing class is this: Your best work is going to
come from your compost pile. Not the neighbor’s yard. Not television. Not your
head, your thinking, your “idea” for a story. If you aren’t working from compost,
you are going to be spending a lot of time revising.
Anyone who survived childhood has a good, if small, potent compost pile.
The compost pile, to be successful, as you may know, has to be kept covered—
and most people have kept the lid on childhood. It has to be forgotten by the
main brain, the idea-generating self. Most people have forgotten lots of
childhood. Writers have to have a good “forgettery.” That’s part of making
compost: Dump rich raw materials, build up a little heat, and neglect. Alchemy
happens. Compost happens.
So many of my students want to write about anything but where they are
from or who they are—anything but their own terrible, lovely, banal, fascinating
lives. Say your day goes like this: It’s Monday, and on Monday your neighbor
leaves notes to everyone: Please pick up after your animal! You live in a small,
ugly, boring town. You go to school or work. You obsess over your lover, and the
annoying person at work. You play online chess, and eat turkey for lunch, and go
to the mall, and then to a movie. You argue with your mother, and then you get
ready for bed, and settle in with a good book, not doing your homework. This is
your Monday. This is your life.
Instead of writing from underneath that very life, you turn in a story about a
prostitute who likes businessmen. Or a man in World War II who lives in
Chicago and writes letters to the president. Why are you writing these stories,
which draw as their source television and movies and ideas for stories?
Ideas kill art.

Compost feeds it.
Compost is dark, stinky, and messy.
It’s what happened to you, what stuck onto your soul. My main job as a
teacher is to get students to write their compost; compost is where everything
fascinating and good is. And it’s under you. It’s in the backyard of you. Stop
going across town.
Stop importing stories that aren’t really yours. If you aren’t dreaming down
deep into your own history, your own passions, your actual true, real, daily
concerns and obsessions and the shapes of your lived life, you aren’t going to be
able to improve as a writer. You have to start where you are.
If you are a housewife in Cuba, you write about that (Cuba Diaries by
Isadora Tattlin). If you are stuck in a boring town of sniping, marriage-hungry
matchmakers, you write about that (all of Jane Austen). If you are brilliant and
grumpy in Minsk, if you are bored and slightly drunk in Dublin, if you are from
the smallest town in the Midwest, you write about that.
You gotta know what your composted material is. Start with what you have
lived through. Compost—both the backyard kind and the writer kind—takes
about, what, a year, three years, some say seven, to happen. To ripen and mature.
You might not be able to write about things that happened last week. Most new
writers have the best, most rewarding early success writing from the layers of
material they’ve walked around with for a few years. Years.
My compost takes seven years. It’s seven years before I can remove my own
need to present myself as the Beautiful Tormented Misunderstood Star of my
own drama and get at something of the truth.
Compost is how many professional writers refer to their material. How many
times have your friends, the ones who know you are a writer, told you, “That is a
great story. You should write that!”
Or more perversely they might say: “Well, that was horrible, that you were
robbed/mugged/alone at your father’s funeral, but, wow, you can write about it!”
In some way, all writers write about their family. Writers are always writing

about themselves. Sarah, the nineteen-year-old student of mine from a celery
farm in Rockford, Michigan, who wrote the prostitute story, is trying to find her
way to her compost. I wonder if she fears her life lacks adventure, if she fears
people see her as a virginal Midwestern teen, sans experience, sans life. I think
she’s trying to write herself a better script. My job is to nudge her into the stinky
pile she’s been tending. She just doesn’t notice what it is that obsesses her. She
just doesn’t believe her life, her actual life, can teach her what she wants to know
about the world.
We are a tiny cluster of human beings. We write about that tiny cluster. The
best writers are able to lumber down on a stepladder into this mucky, stinky, rich,
fecund place—a place where the good stuff (eggshells, coffee grounds,
onionskins, and paper) transforms into the stuff that feeds, that makes growth
and heat and life.
Compost is your best stuff.
Compost is the stuff of writing.
If you are fourteen years old, your compost bandwidth is probably fairly
narrow, and this is a great, great thing. You don’t have to dig too deep to find
great stuff. Focus softly—dreaming back, and down, and in—and feel your way
gently into the darkest areas, the scariest, wormiest, messiest places in your life,
and just start writing there.
When you notice yourself going back up into the thinking part of your mind,
what do you hear?
This isn’t interesting.
Who cares?
What’s the point of this?
Joey will get mad if I write this about his tattoo and his ex and the sugar
cubes.
I need to sound more like a Writer.
All those sentiments are your head talking.
Forget about ideas. The critic lives in your head. When she appears, go back

to your pile. Say: I’m messing around here. Leave me alone. Don’t listen to your
head. Your material is down in, a vibration just below the level of thought. If you
are twenty-one, your compost pile has some pretty interesting stuff in it. At least
three layers of rich, fecund material. And it’s in your pile. Not in someone else’s
pile.
What I notice about the twenty-one-year-olds I teach is they really, really
don’t want to write about what they know, where they are from, how they see the
world. They want to be anyone else but themselves. Because, I surmise, they
fear that if they are themselves, then the chances are too good they will turn into
their parents.
What’s your compost?
Well, to find it, you will probably want to practice; it’s like panning for gold.
You write (daily, I will keep saying daily). Yesterday I started a new swimming
routine because I want to do a triathlon. I hated the swimming. Then I did it
again today. I was amazingly strong and swam for forty minutes without
stopping. Delicious.
This is how the writing is. Rarely will you want to really sit down and do it.
You’ll want to want that.
To get at your compost, ignore the frenzy of fear and desire that surrounds
the urge. Call the person on the phone, we say to wayward daters. Call the
compost with your writing hand, your imagining mind. Just go do it. You won’t
want to. You’ll hate it. It doesn’t matter. Ignore all the thoughts that come up,
urging you don’t go to the pile, don’t get dirty, keep your clothes clean, stay
inside, watch television. Ignore all that.
Composting will not feel comfortable. Probably ever.
The hundredth time you do it, you will say to yourself, I’m from a small
suburb in the northeast, with only white people, and my father is a bore, and my
mother doesn’t drink enough, and she says unkind things, and my bedroom looks
like I really liked The Simpsons way too much as a child, and I have a collection
of beer cans on my bookshelves, and this is my material!

If you don’t like your compost, live differently, so that in seven years you
will have other material.
HEATHER SELLERS is the author of Page After Page, Chapter After Chapter, and her memoir,
You Don’t Look Like Anyone I Know.

Part 4
SETTING & BACKSTORY:
The Context for Your Story

Chapter 20

CREATING YOUR STORY’S TIME & PLACE
BY DONALD MAASS
Many novelists seem to think of setting as something outside their story. It is
necessary, but it is a bother. It has to be included, yet ought to be dealt with as
efficiently as possible. After all, who wants to read pages and pages of
description? On the other hand, how can your story come alive in the
imaginations of your readers if they can’t see it? Readers, after all, want to be
swept away somewhere else.
How, then, are we to accomplish that without being boring? In nineteenthcentury novel writing, it was usual to treat the landscape as a character in the
story. In the twenty-first century, we may have less patience for scenery, but we
certainly expect to live in the world of the story. So what’s the trick?
As our colleagues in science fiction and fantasy have shown us, building
breakout time and place starts with the realization that the world of the novel is
composed of much more than landscape and rooms. It is milieu, period, fashion,
ideas, human outlook, historical moment, spiritual mood, and more. It is
capturing not only place, but people in an environment; not only history, but
people changing as the story unfolds. Description is the least of it. Bringing
people alive in a place and time is the essence of it.
For example, in Jane Hamilton’s 1994 novel A Map of the World, her firstperson heroine, Alice, begins to lose her bearings when her friend’s daughter
drowns in a pond. In this scene, Alice goes with her husband, Howard, to a
men’s store to buy a suit for the funeral:

At 6:15 the suit was finished. He paid a terrific sum, carefully writing the
figures on Nellie’s check, and then he went into the dressing room to put on
his finery. He emerged, silent, looking down, as if he couldn’t believe that
anything below his neck was still his own body. I stood back marveling at
him, at the handyman, who didn’t care how he looked, who had little use for
daily personal hygiene, and there he was ravishing in his suit. It was only
June and his face was tanned to a deep brown. His teeth were blindingly
white, dangerous to look at, like an eclipse. It was impossible not to admire
him, hard not to want to do something to contain that kind of beauty—drink
him, ingest him, sneak into his shirt and hide for the rest of one’s natural life.
After six years of marriage he had the power to occasionally render me weak
in the knees.
You could say that what Hamilton has done in that passage is to freeze a moment
in time with snapshot clarity. That’s true, but I’d also say that she has brought
alive the world of the story, which is to say, Alice’s world. To put it differently,
the key to bringing an environment alive is not to describe a location objectively,
but to get inside the people who live there and let us know how they feel about
what’s around them.

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF PLACE
Have you ever said to yourself, This place gives me the creeps? If so, you have
experienced the psychological influence of inert physical surroundings. We are
affected by what is around us.
If you have ever stood in a room designed by Frank Lloyd Wright, you know
his interiors make you relax. The high-vaulting arches of Notre Dame can lift
you to a spiritual plane. A simple Shaker meeting room does both things
simultaneously; it is inner peace and fervent piety captured in four walls.
Anne Rivers Siddons is good at evoking the world of the tidewater
Carolinas. In her 1997 novel Up Island, however, she brings her heroine Molly

Bell Redwine north to Martha’s Vineyard to repair herself after a marital
breakup. At the end of the summer season, Molly rents a small cottage on a
remote up-island pond. The conjunction of house, landscape, and shattered spirit
is deftly detailed:
The house stood in full sun on the slope of the ridge that seemed to sweep
directly up into the steel-blue sky. Below it, the lane I had just driven on
wound through low, dense woodlands, where the Jeep had plunged in and out
of dark shade. But up here there was nothing around the house except a
sparse stand of wind-stunted oaks, several near-to-collapsing outbuildings,
and two or three huge, freestanding boulders left, I knew, by the receding
glacier that had formed this island. Above the house, the ridge beetled like a
furrowed brow, matted with low-growing blueberry and huckleberry bushes.
At the very top, no trees grew at all. I looked back down and caught my
breath at the panorama of Chilmark Pond and the Atlantic Ocean. It was a
day of strange, erratic winds and running cloud shadow, and the patch-work
vista below me seemed alive, pulsing with shadow and sun, trees and ocean
moving restlessly in the wind. Somehow it disquieted me so that I had to turn
and face the closed door of the big, old house. I had come here seeking the
shelter of the up-island wood, but this tall, blind house, alone in its ocean of
space and dazzle of hard, shifting light, offered me no place to hide.
The power of this passage results from more than the objects that it describes.
Molly is uniquely affected by the light and landscape around her. Another
character might have seen it as bright and refreshing. Molly, in her grief,
experiences it as harsh and comfortless. See the difference? That is the
psychology of place.
You can deepen the psychology of place in your story by returning to a
previously established setting and showing how your character’s perception of it
has changed. You can also give your characters an active relationship to place,
which, in turn, means marking your characters’ growth (or decline) through their

relationships to their various surroundings. That, in turn, demands that you be
writing in a strong point of view, regardless of whether your novel is first or
third person.
Do you have plain vanilla description in your current manuscript? Try
evoking the description the way it is experienced by a character. Feel the
difference? So will your readers.

KEEPING UP WITH THE TIMES
As important in a story as a sense of place is a sense of time, both the exact
historical moment and the passing hours, days, years, decades, centuries, or even
millennia (if you are James A. Michener).
One of the appealing aspects of historical settings is not only discovering the
charm or grittiness of a past era, but finding that folks back then felt pretty much
as we do now, even to the point of longing for their own “good old days.” In
contemporary stories of standout caliber, a sense of the historical moment is also
captured. What makes our time—this very moment in history—similar to or
different from any other?
As I am sure you can anticipate, the answer once again lies in your
characters’ perceptions of these things. The great contemporary satirist Tom
Wolfe is a master of capturing our times. His 1998 novel A Man in Full is a
dead-on depiction of the South of the 1990s—Atlanta, in particular. All the
social aspirations and insecurities of its denizens are pinned, wriggling, to the
novel’s hilarious pages. His portrait of our era and its follies, though, does not
have a dry, documentary quality. Its dynamic colors are delivered through strong
points of view.
M.M. Kaye’s grand romantic epic of British Colonial India, The Far
Pavilions (1978), is suffused throughout with details of the political and social
shifts underway in that time and place. The novel tells the story of Ash, an
English army officer raised as a Hindu, and of the Indian princess he loves,
Anjuli, who eventually is married off to a wealthy Rana. When the Rana dies,

Ash saves Juli from suttee (the immolation of living wives with their dead
husbands) and proposes to marry her. They argue over this possibility. This
minor moment is enriched with details that convey a sense of changing times:
“They will never permit you to marry me,” said Anjuli with tired conviction.
“The Bhithoris? They won’t dare open their mouths!”
“No, your people; and mine also, who will be of the same mind.”
“You mean they will try to prevent it. But it’s no business of theirs. This
is our affair: yours and mine. Besides, didn’t your own grandfather marry a
princess of Hind, though he was a foreigner and not of her faith?”
Anjuli sighed and shook her head again. “True. But that was in the days
before your Raj had come to its full power. There was still a Mogul on the
throne in Delhi and Ranjit-Singh held sway over the Punjab; and my
grandfather was a great war-lord who took my grandmother as the spoils of
war without asking any man’s leave, having defeated the army of my
grandmother’s father in battle. I have been told that she went willingly, for
they loved each other greatly. But the times have changed and that could not
happen now.”
This is not a historical romance bashed out in six months to meet a deadline.
This is not a conversation happening between contemporary Americans dressed
in saris. Kaye is intimate with the details of the Raj era and lavishes them on her
splendid novel. So fine is her sense of that time and place, Kaye is able to
vividly locate her characters in a particular moment in the long sweep of Indian
history.
Your characters live in an era, but which one? And in what stage of its life?
Find the moments in the story that delineate that distinction, detail them from a
prevailing point of view, and you will be on your way to enhancing your novel
with a sense of the times.

WORKING WITH HISTORICAL FORCES AND SOCIAL

TRENDS
A breakout setting is even more than the psychology of physical surroundings
and a sense of the times. Setting can also be social context. Social trends and
political ideas influence our real actions and thinking, so why not those in our
novels, too?
Anne Perry’s Slaves of Obsession (2000) is an 1860s mystery featuring
moody “agent of inquiry” William Monk and his wife, nurse Hester Latterly. In
the novel’s opening, conversation at a dinner party turns to the American Civil
War, then just a few months old. A Union idealist, Breeland, wants the dinner’s
host, a British arms merchant named Alberton, to go back on his promise to sell
a large quantity of state-of-the-art rifles to the South. Breeland’s rigid morality is
grating, but it has won over Alberton’s passionately idealistic daughter, sixteenyear-old Merrit. Later, the story takes Monk and Hester to America in pursuit of
Merrit, who was abducted from, or fled, London on the night of her father’s
murder and the theft of the guns, which Alberton had sold to the South but have
been diverted to the Union. Upon their arrival, Hester observes New York:
Hester was fascinated. It was unlike any city she had previously seen: raw,
teeming with life, a multitude of tongues spoken, laughter, shouting, and
already the hand of war shadowing over it, a brittleness in the air. There were
recruitment posters on the walls and soldiers in a wild array of uniforms in
the streets.
Business seemed poor and the snatches of talk she overheard were of
prize fights, food prices, local gossip and scandal, politics, and secession.
She was startled to hear suggestion that even New York itself might secede
from the Union, or New Jersey.
There is also debate about whether the South has the right to secede, and
whether the North has the right to impose union. Later, in Washington, Monk
and Hester meet up with an arms procurer for the South, Philo Trace, who

wishes to help them find Merrit and Breeland. Trace’s views on Northerners are
those of a practical Southerner:
“Most of them have never even seen a plantation, let alone thought about
how it worked. I haven’t seen many myself.” He gave a harsh little laugh,
jerky, as if he had caught his breath. “Most of us in the south are small
farmers, working our own land. You can go for dozens of miles and that’s all
you’ll see. But it’s the cotton and the tobacco that we live on. That’s what we
sell to the north and it’s what they work in the factories and ship abroad.”
He stopped suddenly, lowering his head and pushing his hand across his
brow, forcing his hair back so hard it must have hurt. “I don’t really know
what this war is all about, why we have to be at each other’s throats. Why
can’t they just leave us alone? Of course there are bad slave owners, men
who beat their field slaves, and their house slaves, and nothing happens to
them even if they kill them! But there’s poverty in the north as well, and
nobody fights about that! Some of the industrial cities are full of starving,
shivering men and women—and children—with nobody to take them in or
feed them. No one gives a damn! At least a plantation owner cares for his
slaves, for economic reasons if not common decency.”
By eschewing modern morality in her characterizations, Perry makes her people
live with a realism that enlarges her fiction.
Whatever the scope of your novel, it will benefit from a depiction of the
social context in which it takes place. Your characters live in society, but in
which strata? At what point is their social position most keenly felt? At what
moment does it change? Does your heroine’s status rise or fall? How can she
tell? Are your cast of characters aware of the way in which society is evolving?
No? Well, why not? A wide-angle view of the civilization around your story will
magnify the story in exciting ways.

GOD AT WORK IN THE WORLD

Fate or chance? Choice or predestination? What range of freedom do you feel
your characters have? Do they control their own destinies, or are their actions in
part futile? Do unexpected events overtake them, or do they act according to a
plan? You may not think of God as part of the setting of your novel, but the
actions of the universe, if any, upon your characters are an important
consideration in the novel’s construction.
Whatever your religion, there is a shared sense that the universe is larger
than us, wouldn’t you agree? Do you not feel it on dark, clear winter nights when
you stare at the array of stars in the Milky Way? Have you felt the flash of
understanding that death is real, perhaps after just narrowly missing a fatal
accident? Have you ever been moved to tears by the self-sacrifice of a genuine
heroine? Does the love of your spouse sometimes reduce you to humble
gratitude? If you have experienced any of those feelings, then you know what it
is to be lifted out of yourself for a moment.
If you do not have a moment of unexpected tragedy or grace in your novel,
consider where you might put it in. Shatter your protagonist with a tragedy or
give her an unexpected gift. These things happen in real life, and in a novel they
lend an enlarged perspective, a sense that the universe is paying attention. To put
it another way, if God is at work in the world of your novel, then you have a
chance at giving your readers an experience that is humbling, joyful, and maybe
even transforming.
How do you weave a sense of destiny at work into the setting of your story?
Look for places, people, and situations that are larger than your characters. Is the
couple in your romance novel going to break up? Where? In a car? Okay, then
why not place that car at a rise in a highway with a mile-long traffic jam
stretching in both directions? Not only is the metaphor of being stuck now made
visible, but you also have available to you a dramatic exit for one of your
protagonists.
Kitchens, living rooms, offices, and other commonplace settings are familiar
and easy, but what resonance do they have? Usually very little. Think canyons,

sports stadiums, airports, squad cars, life rafts, recovery rooms, whatever.
Settings that are emptier or more crowded than usual, or that have change or
inherent drama built into them, can envelop your scenes with the unfolding of
other destinies.
God works in little ways as well as big ones, so look for small moments of
magic as well as large ones. Have you ever felt that something that happened to
you was fated? Your first meeting with your future spouse, for instance? Many
people share that experience. Paths intersect in ways that are not accidents.
Small coincidences lead to large changes. People repeat those special stories for
years, have you noticed?
Little miracles become our personal myths. What are the little miracles that
bring your characters to their moments of grand destiny? Find them. Mark them.
Revisit them in retrospect, and the hand of God will show in your story.

THE SECRET INGREDIENT
The great novelists of the past and the breakout novelists of today employ many
approaches to setting, but all have one element in common: detail. A setting
cannot live unless it is observed in its pieces and particulars. A place is the sum
of its parts. The emotions that it evokes are most effective when they are specific
—better still, when they are unique.
One of the great achievements in descriptiveness of recent decades can be
found in the German novel Perfume (1987) by Patrick Süskind (stylishly
translated into English by John E. Woods). Perfume concerns an abominable
perfumer’s apprentice whose twisted pleasure is using the methods of his craft to
capture the scent of young virgins at the moments of their deaths. He is a serial
killer motivated by scent. The novel is set in eighteenth-century France. All its
description is olfactory. No sights, sounds, touchs, or tastes are presented. Here
is Süskind’s opening description of this world:

In the period of which we speak, there reigned in the cities a stench barely
conceivable to us modern men and women. The streets stank of manure, the
courtyards of urine, the stairwells stank of moldering wood and rat
droppings, the kitchens of spoiled cabbage and mutton fat; the unaired
parlors stank of stale dust, the bedrooms of greasy sheets, damp featherbeds,
and the pungently sweet aroma of chamber pots. The stench of sulfur rose
from the chimneys, the stench of caustic lyes from the tanneries, and from
the slaughterhouses came the stench of congealed blood. People stank of
sweat and unwashed clothes; from their mouths came the stench of rotting
teeth, from their bellies that of onions, and from their bodies, if they were no
longer very young, came the stench of rancid cheese and sour milk and
tumorous disease. The rivers stank, the marketplaces stank, the churches
stank, it stank beneath the bridges and in the palaces. … And of course the
stench was foulest in Paris, for Paris was the largest city of France.
Notice how Süskind achieves this effect: with details. Manure, urine, cabbage,
mutton fat, featherbeds, sulfur, lyes, unwashed clothes, rotting teeth, rancid
cheese, sour milk … not once does he try to explain what those things smell like.
Instead, he catalogs those awful odors, allowing his readers’ memories to call up
the necessary associations.
Details can also convey a character’s feelings about place. George R.R.
Martin’s 1982 novel Fevre Dream is not written in the first person. Nevertheless,
by writing from a strong point of view, Martin is able to let us know exactly how
his characters feel. Fevre Dream is about steamboat captain Abner Marsh, who
in 1857 dreams of setting a record for the journey down the Mississippi River to
New Orleans. An icy winter has ruined his dilapidated fleet, but then a wellheeled stranger offers to build him his dream boat. Here is Marsh’s first view of
the finished vessel in a boatyard:
The mists gave way for them, and there she stood, high and proud, dwarfing
all the other boats around her. Her cabins and rails gleamed with fresh paint

pale as snow, bright even in the gray shroud of fog. Way up on her texas
roof, halfway to the stars, her pilot house seemed to glitter; a glass temple, its
ornate cupola decorated all around with fancy woodwork as intricate as Irish
lace. Her chimneys, twin pillars that stood just forward of the texas deck,
rose up a hundred feet, black and straight and haughty. Their feathered tops
bloomed like two dark metal flowers. Her hull was slender and seemed to go
on forever, with her stern obscured by the fog. Like all the first-class boats,
she was a side-wheeler. Set amidship, the huge curved wheelhouses loomed
gigantic, hinting at the vast power of the paddle wheels concealed within
them. They seemed all the larger for want of the name that would soon be
emblazoned across them.
Notice how skillfully Martin uses his detailing to suggest the pride that Marsh
feels in his new steamboat: … gleamed … bright … fresh … halfway to the stars
… seemed to glitter … a glass temple … black and straight and haughty … like
all the first-class boats. Marshaling detail and learning the art of writing in
nouns and verbs are essential to success in any type of writing. That is especially
true in the breakout novel. An expansive setting is not vague. It is highly
particular.
DONALD MAASS is the founder of Donald Maass Literary Agency, which sells more than 150
novels every year. He is the author of Writing the Breakout Novel, The Fire in Fiction, and The
Breakout Novelist.

Chapter 21

REFINE YOUR SETTING SKILL SET
BY BRIAN KITELEY
What makes the location of a story vivid is what makes it human. Faulkner’s
Mississippi is humid, subtropical, and dark green with red dirt, but its scars of
slavery and a lost war can’t be described, yet can’t be avoided.
The town I grew up in was a dying mill town that had a college for women in
its midst. When I left for college in 1974, The Insider’s Guide to the Colleges
complained that Northampton closed shop at six in the evening, and all that
stayed open after that was the Dunkin’ Donuts. By 1984, that was a laughable
statement. When the drinking age was briey lowered to 18 in the early 1970s,
the town began to ourish as a magnet for young people who were no longer in
college (bars began to cater to Smith College students, as well as these
newcomers). Now Northampton is cool, an epicenter of food, music, and the
arts, with a substantial lesbian population.
Get to know your hometown—or your hometowns. Do research. Go out and
interview people: friends, family and the person who was mayor ten years ago.
You write best about the places you know best, but you may not know your own
locales as well as you think.
Here are some exercises and prompts to get you thinking about the art of
crafting a strong setting in any type of town.

USE YOUR IMAGINATION
Imagine this small town without doing any research: Biggar, Saskatchewan, is
whatever you want to make of it, except for the sign outside of town on the
highways leading into Biggar. Write a fragment of fiction about this place.

Populate it with whomever you’d like. Most of these people will be Canadians,
but other than that you’re free to do whatever you wish. This is an exercise to
challenge you to take a real place and fictionalize it, based on nothing more than
your own sense of what it might be like and what you want it to be. This is also
an exercise in imagining your way into the life of a very small town. If you’re a
city person, or someone who grew up in a town of even 30,000 (as I did), you
may have difficulty imagining the world of a village with 432 souls, for example
(I’m not saying Biggar is that big or small). Aim for about 750 words.

WRITE AN INTERNATIONAL LOVE STORY
Write a fragment of fiction about high school sweethearts who live in two towns
very close to each other but separated by the U.S.–Canada border, say Oroville,
Washington, and Osoyoos, British Columbia, both of which are on Osoyoos
Lake; or Vanceboro, Maine, and St. Croix, New Brunswick. They might be
children of prominent citizens of these very small towns. They watch the same
TV shows, listen to the same radio stations, read the same newspapers
(sometimes), and they’ve grown up in very similar surroundings. But one is
Canadian and one is American. Explore the differences between these two
cultures. Do some research. Write 500 words.

COMBINE PAST AND PRESENT
Choose a setting and present both a relatively modern version (though it may be
slightly historical, like 1952 Biloxi or 1985 Oshkosh) and a version of the same
place one hundred years before. Write about one historical moment for two
paragraphs, then about a modern moment for two paragraphs. For the last
sentences of the piece, alternate sentence by sentence between the modern and
older versions, making sure the reader can reasonably understand this
alternation. This exercise should be seven paragraphs and about 750 words long.

MASTER METONYMY

Write a biography of a real country. This will have to be ridiculously condensed.
Or you may choose a few exemplary tiny stories to stand for this country. Keep
this one at 250 words.
Metonymy is crucial for this type of writing (an example of metonymy is the
crown standing for the queen). We see something and we’re desperate to make it
mean something else or some much larger thing. We create narrative where it
does not exist, because we’re narrative minded. We create metonymy in the
same way. Think of a traveler’s perspective. Travelers often see the worlds they
visit in ways no local could possibly see them—travelers have the keys to the
local myths, but they can’t communicate these myths to the locals. That’s your
job here. Find a handful of metonymic images or symbols that stand for a whole
country.

CREATE A LOST SETTING
Write about a town that has disappeared. It could be a Palestinian village on a
hillside in what is now Israel, forcibly evacuated and then “erased” from maps
and view (though there are remains of the town that show its outlines from the
air). It could be a ghost town in the American West—a gold rush boomtown that
remains but is empty of people. It could be an African town erased by the
encroaching Sahara. There are also new ghost towns on the Great Plains in
Kansas, Nebraska, and the Dakotas that are slowly (or sometimes quickly)
depopulating. Or it could be a village sunk under the Quabbin Reservoir, which
was made in the 1930s in Massachusetts.
Write about it at three different times: in the present; at the moment of its last
human habitation; and at its most vibrant, lively apex. In other words, write the
history of this town backwards. Write 500 words.

PORTRAY A NAKED CITY
“There are 8 million stories in the Naked City. This has been one of them.”
Those were the closing lines of the voice-over narration of the police drama

Naked City, which ran from 1958–1963. The show broke new ground for TV
dramas—no neat resolutions and trials for every episode, like Dragnet, which
was on the air around the same time. The show also introduced the novelty of
location shoots, many in the south Bronx near where the series was produced,
and New York City became its biggest star. The series was inspired by a 1948
film of the same name by Jules Dassin, one of the prototypical film noirs of that
period.
For this exercise, write an examination of a big city: Chicago, Los Angeles,
Mexico City, Tokyo, Cairo, New York, or any place you know well. Populate the
city with brief brushstroke portraits of its inhabitants. Aim for 500 words.

MYTHOLOGIZE HOME
Write a short fragment of nonfiction prose in which you venerate your own
home state. Do some research first. Find out the state bird, the state lizard, the
biggest cash crop, the last politician to commit suicide while in office. Write as if
you are writing an official report, in advertising or chamber of commerce
language. Include your own life story around the edges of this fake pamphlet.
The target length: 750 words.
BRIAN KITELEY is the author of three novels and The 3 A.M.. Epiphany and The 4 A.M.
Breakthrough.

Chapter 22

WHY BACKSTORY IS ESSENTIAL
BY LARRY BROOKS
In the fall of 2009, a football player at the University of Oregon made national
news—and YouTube—by punching a Boise State University player after losing
the opening game of the season. It was an immediate hit (pun intended) on the
Boise State University stadium’s JumboTron, then on the news as it was
dissected every which way by sportscasters, and finally in the court of public
opinion. None of it pretty.
The player was suspended for the season. Massive approval ensued in the
press and among the general public. The school saved its waning reputation. The
new coach saved his job. The critics saved face. And in the process the player
lost his dream and possibly a shot at an NFL career.
Great story, eh? Know what makes it even better? Something called the
backstory. The events and dynamics that preceded the event itself but continue
to exert influence on the players in this little athletic soap opera.
There was a lot that went into the dynamics of that dark moment—just as
there is a lot that goes into the dynamics of the key moments in your stories.
The loss of that player’s cool was his third dimension of character—his true
character—exposing itself. As were the decisions that were made after the fact,
by the coach and by the player. The reasons behind it all, though—the backstory
—were second-dimension issues of characterization. And while they didn’t get
that much play in the press, they would be essential if this true story were part of
your novel.

In the heated moment it went down, the punch was a combination of both
superficial and deep-seated issues driving the player’s decisions and actions. The
way the player danced and backpedaled with a recycled Mike Tyson shuffle after
the cheap shot was thrown was a first-dimension, or surface-level, character
quirk. It meant nothing … unless you think it did. And that’s the point. But the
punch itself was all third dimension, an expression of character that had nothing
at all to do with impressing anyone—it was all about who that guy was at his
core.
Which, interestingly enough, was precisely the opposite of what critics of the
decision to suspend, and later the coach himself, cited as a counterpoint. That
view held that the moment did not represent the true character of the young
athlete at all, that he was merely caught up in the moment. Which raises the
question—if that were true, would every player on the Oregon roster have done
the same thing?

USING BACKSTORY TO ADD DEPTH TO CHARACTERS
In our fiction, it’s our job to give our characters such moments to react to. The
decisions and actions they take in those moments are absolutely expressions of
their true character, arising from the third dimension of character depth.
Throwing a punch isn’t a first-dimension affectation. The second-dimension
background of the young man is what it is, and in the moment when it counted,
he reverted to his truer nature.
Here’s the backstory of this example: First of all, the offending player had
come from a culture of conflict—the mean streets of the inner city—with
childhood, scholastic, and domestic backgrounds that positioned football as his
ticket out. His hope. Prior to the incident he was a budding star, a tale of triumph
over adversity. The next day he was done.
Remember nothing fuels a story quite like hope.
Then there was the hype leading up to the game itself, in which the player
boasted to the press about how Oregon would “whoop on” this opponent (all this

being first-dimension trash talk), leading toward what he hoped would be
revenge against a loss to these same guys the previous year.
Then the coach wrote it all off as part of football being an aggressive game
played by aggressive young men, all but sanctioning the trash talk, and thus
fueling the bad blood between the two teams and schools. At this point nobody
on the Oregon side was being accused of having high character, and nobody on
the Boise State University side was saying anything at all.
Show enough backstory to allow the reader to glean and make assumptions
about what remains behind the curtain of time, yet continues to influence the
character’s worldview, attitudes, decisions and actions.
Then there was the kid who received the cheap shot to the jaw, a defensive
tackle the size of a small bus, who after his team pummeled Oregon in
convincing fashion, confronted the guilty player with taunting words and an
unfriendly tap on the shoulder pads. One can almost write that dialogue from
where you sit. He reportedly had a history—a backstory—of mouthing off and
would be receiving a talking-to for his role. Also a first-dimension issue of
characterization, leading to third-dimension consequences. All of this is
backstory. What went down before, and behind, the actual event.
From there it gets worse. The Oregon coach had second thoughts about the
season suspension of his star running back and decided to bring the offending
player back to the team, albeit with certain academic and citizenship criteria and
conditions, which were never disclosed. This apparent change of heart was in
direct contradiction to his proud and prompt disciplinary action the day after the
incident, for which he had accepted gracious praise. Enough human psychology
to fuel a season of soap operas with a bubbling stew of first-, second-and thirddimension characterization.
Backstory is the stuff of second-dimension characterization. It can explain
and rationalize both first-dimension affectations and third-dimension choices and
behaviors, and it can stand in contrast to either, in which case it adds an

interesting layer of complexity to it all. Either way, great stories always cover
this base.

FINDING THE RIGHT BALANCE OF BACKSTORY
Your characters’ actions need to have psychological validity and, at the very
least, a visible connection to some behavioral explanation (second dimension)
with roots in the past. Backstory is how you make that happen.
Some writers actually write out a backstory for their major characters, often
at great length. The objective of this exercise is to create a linkage between their
actions within the story and the psychological roots that fueled them. There is,
however, a risk if you choose to craft a detailed backstory ahead of time. By
writing out and investing a lot of energy in a backstory, you’ll be tempted to use
too much of it.
If you’re writing your story on the fly, you’ll have to retrofit a backstory that
makes sense in a subsequent draft. But just like everything else about
storytelling, you can choose to play this element in detail, and with proper
context. If you don’t get it right, you’ll find yourself with a one-dimensional
hero.
The trick is to show just enough backstory that the reader can intuit where
the character is coming from. Flashback scenes solely for the purpose of
explaining backstory are rarely a good idea. You should be artful and subtle in
delivering backstory as part of the narrative flow, rather than spelling it out.
Then again, if backstory is a major element of the story—as it is, for
example, in Dennis Lehane’s novels Mystic River and Shutter Island—you can
certainly weave it into the narrative as you see fit.
Here’s the primary guideline, called the “iceberg principle”: Show about only
10 percent of your character’s backstory. Literally. A glimpse, leading to an
ongoing context. Show enough to allow the reader to glean and make
assumptions about what remains behind the curtain of time, yet continues to
influence the character’s worldview, attitudes, decisions, and actions.

RECOGNIZING
BACKSTORY

THE

POWERFUL

EFFECTS

OF

As it is with many elements of storytelling, the best way to get a feel for
execution is to look for and acknowledge it when you see it in other stories.
Pretty much every novel you read and movie you see will have a strategic
backstory in play. Your job as a writer-in-progress, or even a crusty old pro, is to
notice how it’s done and reflect what you’ve learned in your own manuscript.
In the TV drama Castle, the backstory involves the occupation of the hero
and his playboy ways. He’s a famous novelist with a talent for womanizing and
an aversion to commitment. That explains his role and his attitude as he works
alongside a gorgeous police detective doing her best to remain immune to his
undeniable charms, not to mention his investigative sensibilities.
In the hit show House, the lead character brings a backstory of drug
addiction (to quell the pain of a major leg problem) and relationship failure to
every episode. This licenses his continued pill popping and interpersonal abuse,
which juxtaposes his diagnostic genius to create a complex and fascinating hero
who does his best to masquerade as an antihero. Each episode offers delicious
subtext as the characters openly discuss their efforts to mess with one another—a
tasty stew of first-, second-and third-dimension characterization that has become
a perennial Emmy nominee.
In the movie Avatar, the hero’s backstory is visible: He’s disabled from his
military service, and he’s the brother of a highly trained guinea pig about to
participate in a massively technical scientific experience. Unforeseen events
result in the hero taking his brother’s place, and his lack of experience—direct
from the backstory—becomes the primary catalyst in his relationships and his
experiences.
These are just a few examples of the many ways that with a deft touch and an
understanding that backstory is a contextual tool, rather than part of the real-time
storytelling sequence, you can infuse characters with believability and
accessibility, both of which are essential to reader empathy.

LARRY BROOKS is the author of five critically acclaimed thrillers and Story Engineering:
Mastering the 6 Core Competencies of Successful Writing.

Crafting Backstory for a Series
If you’re writing a series, backstory is even more critical. In fact, the influence of backstory is
the primary thing—in addition to the character and her ongoing growth—that carries over
from book to book. Each novel should stand alone in terms of a book-specific plot, with full
resolution delivered. But the backstory-inspired story line remains unsolved, though each
entry should move that level of the story forward concurrent with the complete resolution of
the more immediate plotline.
Harry Potter is a great example of this. Harry’s past is the driving force of the ongoing
tension in the series, as Harry gets ever closer to finding a way to thwart the plans of the dark
wizard who murdered his parents and as, once discovered, Harry maneuvers himself into
position to exact revenge in the name of justice.
The first book in a series is where the backstory naturally gets the most play and focus.
What you establish there—which may comprise the book-specific plotline in this first volume
—becomes a less-direct focus in subsequent books, though enough revisiting is required to
acquaint new readers with the driving context that continues to exert a powerful influence.
We see this everywhere on television, where we are used to watching episodic series. In
the old classic The Fugitive, backstory permeated every scene, yet each episode found Dr.
Richard Kimble presented with a new adventure and a new problem to solve.
Novelists can learn much from television with regard to how to connect episodes of a
series, and the focus of that learning curve is always backstory.

Chapter 23

SIX WAYS TO LAYER IN BACKSTORY
BY HALLIE EPHRON
Suppose you’re writing a novel that starts with a brutal rape and murder. In the
opening scene, Renata Ruiz, a medical examiner, inspects the body. The reader
doesn’t know that Renata grew up dirt poor on a farm in central California, put
herself through college, modeled for the Playboy college issue to make ends
meet and, most important, was the victim of a brutal rapist who also raped and
murdered her roommate and best friend. Yet you want to convey all these aspects
of her background because, by the end of the novel, you want Renata to triumph
on two levels—first, putting this sexual pervert in jail, and second, coming to
terms with her own “survivor’s guilt.”
So when do you reveal Renata’s backstory?
Tell it a little at a time. Too much backstory in the beginning can bog down
your novel before you get it off the ground. Initially your reader may need to
know only that Renata is an experienced medical examiner. Then, once you’re
airborne, slip in more at opportune moments.
The really dramatic information that resonates with this investigation—that
Renata was herself a rape victim and her best friend was murdered by the rapist
—is best revealed in layers as part of the unfolding drama. You might slip in,
early on, that Renata was a crime victim. Later, that she was raped. Later still,
that her best friend was raped and murdered. At a major turning point in the
novel, perhaps when Renata is about to confront the villain, you might write a
vivid flashback that dramatizes the rape or her dead friend’s funeral.

The stronger and more compelling your front story, the more backstory it can
hold. Here are three rules of thumb to keep in mind:
Hold the backstory until your novel is launched.
Gradually layer in backstory wherever it resonates with your main story,
letting the past drama reinforce the drama in the present.
Reveal the backstory in a variety of ways.
So when it comes time to add backstory, what’s the best way to do it? Here are
six strategies.

FIRST-PERSON NARRATION
A first-person narrator can break the “fourth wall”—that imaginary barrier
between the characters and the audience—and tell the reader about his past. In
this example from Kathy Reichs’s Monday Mourning, Temperance Brennan
enters a courtroom. As she walks up the center aisle, she talks to the reader:
I have testified many times. I have faced men and women accused of
monstrous crimes. Murder. Rape. Torture. Dismemberment. I am always
underwhelmed by the accused.
Voilà. For the reader who hasn’t read the earlier Temperance Brennan novels,
this is a snapshot of her background as an expert witness. Talking directly to the
reader like this is an easy and economical way to convey a first-person narrator’s
background. It’s an efficient device for conveying facts or downplaying some
information that will become important later on. On the downside, it can also be
emotionally flat and lack dramatic impact.

THIRD-PERSON EXPLANATION
Another simple, straightforward way to reveal backstory is to have a thirdperson narrator tell the reader. Here’s an example from Gary Braver’s Elixir:

Chris had been as good as his vow. For six years only one other person at
Darby Pharms knew of his research. They had worked on the sly—nights
and weekends—isolating, purifying, synthesizing, then testing the flower
extract. And Chris got away with it because as senior researcher he had
complete autonomy in the lab and could mask requisitions for material and
animals.
The backstory continues for several pages, explaining the main character’s
research to find an antiaging drug. This information is delivered in the third
chapter, after Braver has set up and launched his story.
Having a third-person narrator give the reader backstory is effective and
efficient, though not dramatic; it’s a good approach to use in small doses after
your story is launched.

REVELATORY DIALOGUE
An equally simple, somewhat more artful way of layering in backstory is
through dialogue. In this example from Mansions of the Dead, Sarah Stewart
Taylor uses dialogue to let her readers know that the protagonist is an expert on
mourning jewelry:
“Sweeney?” Mrs. Pitman’s hesitant voice came over the phone. “This is kind
of strange, but the Cambridge police just called. A Detective Quinn. They
need to talk to someone who knows about mourning jewelry. I thought of
you of course and they said they want to talk to you as soon as possible.”
Done well, dialogue that delivers information like this slides by easily. Done
clumsily, it sounds stagy and artificial, as in this passage that I made up to
demonstrate the point:
“Here’s something right up your alley, Digby,” Prothero said, jabbing his
finger at a newspaper article. “You know all about poisons. Wasn’t your

brother killed eating poisonous mushrooms? I heard that’s why you became
an expert and wrote that definitive pamphlet for the Poison Control Center.”
Digby scanned the story. “Dr. Willem Banks. Died of strychnine
poisoning. Isn’t he that old codger who lives in that huge mansion I wanted
to buy a few years back? Maybe one of my three sisters knew him.”
Yes, we get tons of backstory. There it is, in all its glory, wedged into wooden
dialogue. Never force words into characters’ mouths like this. Use dialogue to
convey backstory only when it feels natural and works dramatically.
The stronger and more compelling your front story, the more backstory it can
hold.

DOCUMENTATION
Another way to deliver backstory is through documents you dream up to serve a
role in your story—wills, newspaper articles, photographs, letters, school
yearbooks, and so on. You can reproduce the “document” or have one of the
characters summarize what’s in it.
For example, your main character might receive a letter from an old friend,
reminiscing about when they were in school together, asking after the main
character’s family, and reminding the character that the friend once saved his
life. Now the friend is cashing in his chips and asking a favor. The letter
effectively moves the story along while delivering information about the main
character’s past.
Backstory Checklist
Each time you layer in some backstory, remember that the stronger and more compelling
your front story, the more backstory it can tolerate. Always remember to:
Be sure this is the dramatically appropriate spot to deliver this layer of backstory.
Choose the most appropriate method to deliver the backstory.
When using memories, trigger them with something in the present.

When employing flashbacks, orient the reader to the time and place shift, shift verb
tense, and then segue back to the main story at the end.

MEMORIES
One of the more dramatic ways to convey backstory is as a memory. In this
example from Luiz Alfredo Garcia-Roza’s A Window in Copacabana, Inspector
Espinosa remembers his grandmother:
He dedicated the following two hours to examining a book that, along with a
few hundred others, he’d inherited from his grandmother. Every once in a
while his grandmother had felt the need to purge some of the thousands of
books piled in two rooms of her apartment, and these were destined for her
grandson, who also inherited her habit of stockpiling books. Their styles
were different: Hers were anarchic piles, his orderly stacks against the wall.
They shared a disdain for shelving.
Looking at a book triggers a memory of Espinosa’s grandmother. This memory
is not essential to the plot but gives the reader insight into Espinosa’s character,
revealing a contemplative, literate side to this tough police inspector. The
“orderly stacks” suggest an orderly mind, and a “disdain for shelving” suggests a
man who lives alone and feels no need to conform to conventions.
Here are some examples of what might trigger a memory:
What a character says: He sounded just like Red, my mentor at the police
academy who …
How a character looks: She had that same look on her face as my first wife,
right before she slapped me with divorce papers.
A dream: I dreamed I was back in elementary school, fourth grade, Mrs.
Joffey standing there, glaring at me bug-eyed, like I had the IQ of a frog …
An object: Whenever I saw that photograph, I thought of Joe and the day
we …

A song: That was our song. I remember the first time …
In this way, snippets of memory conveyed in a sentence or a few paragraphs,
strategically sprinkled throughout your novel, can prove a wonderful and organic
way to reveal layer after layer of your characters’ backstories.

EXTENDED FLASHBACKS
Another strategy for delivering backstory is to insert an extended flashback. An
extended flashback can be a clever way of showing why a character’s past
experience compels him to behave the way he does in the present. It can also
build understanding of how a situation got to be the way it is now.
Here’s how William G. Tapply starts a four-page flashback in the second
chapter of Bitch Creek:
An hour before sunup on a June morning almost exactly five years earlier,
Calhoun had been creeping along the muddy bank of a little tidal creek that
emptied into Casco Bay just north of Portland. A blush of pink had begun to
bleed into the pewter sky toward the east. The tide was about halfway out,
and the water against the banks lay as flat and dark as a mug of camp coffee.
A blanket of fog hung …
A tricky part of writing a flashback is handling the time and space shift. Notice
Tapply does it simply. The time shift: almost exactly five years earlier. The
space shift: along the muddy bank of a little tidal creek.
A second tricky part is handling verb tense. If the main part of your novel is
written in the present tense (he pulls the trigger …), a flashback is written in the
past tense (he once killed a man …). That’s easy. But what if the body of your
novel is written in the past tense? Logic dictates that the flashback would be
written in the past perfect (he once had killed a man …). Notice that the
flashback in the example from Bitch Creek begins that way, in the past-perfect
tense: Calhoun had been creeping … a blush of pink had begun to bleed …

Had, had, had. Past perfect quickly gets cumbersome, but the good news is
once you’ve launched your flashback and oriented the reader by using past
perfect a few times, you can revert to the regular past tense, as Tapply does in
writing, The tide was about halfway out …
At the end of a flashback, once again you need to cue the reader to come
back to the present. To show the transition, insert the past perfect a time or two
at the end of the flashback; when you’re out of the flashback and back in the
main story, revert to past tense. Here’s an example that signals a transition back:
She had never called him. At the time, he had thought it was odd. Now he
wasn’t so sure. He got up and headed …
While an extended flashback is a dramatic way to tell the reader about past
events, keep in mind that it also interrupts the narrative flow of your main story.
Delivered at the wrong time, a flashback can derail the current action and waste
any momentum you’ve gathered. But delivered at the right dramatic moment, a
flashback, like backstory itself, enhances and deepens your story. Use a balance
of these six strategies at the right times, and your subtle backstory will be at its
most powerful.
HALLIE EPHRON is the author of more that ten books including Writing and Selling Your Mystery
Novel: How to Knock ’Em Dead With Style.

Chapter 24

WEAVE IN BACKSTORY TO REVEAL CHARACTER
BY RACHEL BALLON
Creating characters’ backstories is crucial because you’ll want to determine each
one’s past experiences and the repercussions these experiences will have on your
story before you begin. All characters come to your story with a problematic past
and unresolved personal conflicts, so you should have a full understanding of
what these problems are right from the start—even if readers don’t see the
connections until later.
The most common methods you can use to give the audience this important
background information include dialogue, narration, internal dialogue, and
flashbacks. This information must be presented in a natural progression and as
an integral part of the story; otherwise it will seem forced and unnatural.

DIALOGUE
If two people are giving vital information about a character’s backstory in a
factual conversation, it’s likely to be dull and uninteresting to the audience.
However, if you show the same two characters having a heated discussion or
argument, then the information is revealed through conflict, and it’s likely to be
more exciting for readers.
Let’s say, for example, that a couple is having a conversation in a restaurant.
This is rather uninteresting, unless what they are discussing is highly secret. The
situation becomes even more suspenseful if they’re unaware a man is listening to
what they’re saying. The audience is aware of the intruder but the couple isn’t,
and this creates tension. By constantly making the stakes higher and the conflict

greater, you’ll be able to reveal information and backstory while simultaneously
building suspense and keeping the action moving.
Tennessee Williams does an excellent job of providing backstory through
dialogue in A Streetcar Named Desire. When Blanche DuBois comes to visit her
sister, Stella, and Stella’s husband, Stanley Kowalski, at their rundown
apartment, she comes with a suitcase full of secrets. Plus, Stanley hates Blanche
because he knows she feels superior to him, and as a consequence, he lashes out
at Blanche and Stella:
“Who do you think you are? A pair of queens? Now just remember what
Huey Long said—that every man’s a king—and I’m the king around here,
and don’t you forget it!”
Again, Stanley wants to undermine Blanche to Stella when he reminds her of the
good times the two had before Blanche arrived:
“Listen, baby, when we first met—you and me—you thought I was common.
Well, how right you was! I was common as dirt. You showed me a snapshot
of the place with them columns, and I pulled you down off them columns,
and you loved it, having them colored lights goin’! And wasn’t we happy
together? Wasn’t it all OK? Till she showed up here. Hoity-toity, describin’
me like an ape.”
What colorful, rich dialogue Stanley uses to express his present conflict, while at
the same time giving information about his happier past without Blanche.

NARRATION
Although it’s not done much in modern plays, playwrights used to develop
characters who walked directly out of the set or stood in front of the curtain to
provide revealing information about the characters to the audience. In Thornton
Wilder’s Pulitzer Prize-winning Our Town, the character of the Stage Manager
functions as the narrator when he relates to the audience:

This is the way we were in our growing-up and in our marrying and in our
doctoring and in our living and in our dying.

INNER DIALOGUE
Thoughts or interior dialogue can also be valuable tools for revealing a
character’s backstory and psychology. Take a look at this example from Judith
Guest’s novel Ordinary People. Here, we see the central character, Conrad
Jarrett, interacting with his swim coach. Notice Conrad’s internal thoughts in
italics, which ultimately provide readers with more insight into what the boy’s
truly feeling and thinking:
“Jarrett, you got to be kidding me. I don’t get it. I excuse you from practice
twice a week so you can see some shrink. … What the hell more am I
supposed to be doing for you?”
“Nothing.” Shrink. Hate that word coarse ignorant just like the kind of
word you’d expect from stupid bastard like Salan will not get mad control is
all just someday come down here tell him what he can do with his goddamn
ignorant opinions.

FLASHBACKS
When you interject a scene from the past into the present plot, you’re using
flashback. Flashbacks are done either visually, as in film, or by using a
character’s interior thoughts or interior monologue, as in prose. The flashback
gives information or an explanation about a specific character or event that is
important for the audience to know. Be careful, however, not to use a flashback
if it has no relationship to the present scene; doing so will create confusion.
Flashbacks can often slow down a story or interrupt the flow, and you’ll want to
make sure you weave them in smoothly.
Toward the end of F. Scott Fitzgerald’s The Great Gatsby, the narrator of the
novel, Nick Carraway, relates through summary Gatsby’s last night with Daisy

before Gatsby goes off to war:
On the last afternoon before he went abroad, he sat with Daisy in his arms
for a long, silent time. It was a cold fall day, with fire in the room and her
cheeks flushed. Now and then she moved and he changed his arm a little, and
once he kissed her dark shining hair. The afternoon had made them tranquil
for a while, as if to give them a deep memory for the long parting the next
promised. They had never been closer in their month of love, nor
communicated more profoundly one with another, than when she brushed
silent lips against his coat’s shoulder or when he touched the end of her
fingers, gently, as though she were asleep.
This flashback provides readers with a glimpse of the relationship Gatsby and
Daisy once shared, and adds emphasis to angst now felt by Gatsby as he watches
Daisy with her husband, Tom.
Remember that you want a flashback to enhance your present story and
allow the audience to learn secrets from the past, so they’ll understand what’s
happening. But don’t rely on flashbacks to structure your story, and make sure
you use them sparingly.
RACHEL BALLON is a is a licensed psychotherapist, script consultant, and author of Breathing
Life into your Characters: How to Give Your Characters Emotional & Psychological Depth.

Chapter 25

HOW TO BUILD SUSPENSE WITH BACKSTORY
BY LEIGH MICHAELS
To keep the readers’ attention through the long midsection of your book, you’ll
need to continually develop the conflict and advance the plot in logical steps
without making the story predictable. What keeps readers turning pages is
suspense, which you can create using a variety of techniques, including tension,
pacing, and foreshadowing.
The suspense we’re discussing here doesn’t necessarily involve the
characters being in peril; it’s created whenever there’s something the reader
wants to know. Will Joe kiss Brenda? Will Sally give in to Brad’s demand that
she work for him? Will Jared answer Katherine’s question or dodge it?
Whenever you cause readers to be curious about what comes next, you’re
creating suspense. Suspense arises naturally from good writing—it’s not a spice
to be added separately.
Putting too much backstory early in the book to divulge information about
your characters can bore your readers and destroy any suspense you may have
established.
In fiction, you create suspense by withholding information, and the best type
of information to withhold is often the backstory. You, as the author, can create
suspense in three main ways:
BY WITHHOLDING INFORMATION FROM READERS. As the author,
you know the entire hidden story behind the plot and characters: the backstory
and the plot twists that are yet to come. You might be tempted to spill out the

backstory and hidden story right away, but most stories are improved when at
least some of that information is held back—sometimes up to the very end.
BY

WITHHOLDING

INFORMATION

FROM

THE

MAIN

CHARACTERS. This is the Hitchcock effect—so called because Alfred
Hitchcock was a master of it in his films. By reading between the lines and
applying common sense and experience, the readers (like Hitchcock’s movie
audience) can draw conclusions about what’s likely to be coming up. But, like
the movie audience, the readers are powerless to prevent a character from
stepping into a yawning trap that only readers can foresee.
BY HAVING THE CHARACTERS WITHHOLD INFORMATION FROM
THE READERS—AND FROM ONE ANOTHER. Just because a character
knows something doesn’t mean he has to share it (even if he’s a POV character).
And even hidden motives will affect how a character acts, cluing in alert readers
to what’s really going on.
When you’re writing scenes in which suspense is crucial, you also need to know
what to avoid. Keep in mind that putting too much backstory early in the book,
or using too much introspection to divulge information about your characters, is
a great way to bore the readers and destroy any suspense you may have
established.
There are, however, five simple steps you can take to increase the level of
suspense in your scenes.
Keep the action intense. If significant amounts of time go by without
suspenseful action—which is often most powerfully motivated by backstory
—the story loses momentum and readers lose interest.
Make the danger feel real. If the hero and heroine stop in the middle of a
chase to share a passionate interlude while trusting dumb luck to keep them
from being discovered, it’s going to be hard to convince readers that they
have reason to be fearful. If readers are to believe the danger, then the

characters must act as if they’re threatened. Even if the danger isn’t
physical, keep pressure on the characters. Don’t stop for backstory; weave it
in.
Keep the emotion high. Even if the story doesn’t involve physical danger
for the characters, their lifelong happiness is at stake. Keeping emotions at
the core of the story reminds readers how important the situation is.
Repeat an action, phrase, or event. The first use of the action or line of
dialogue may be almost casual, doing little more than getting the readers’
attention. The second use makes it clear that this bit of information is
important (though readers may not quite see why) and foreshadows the
important action to come. The third use is the most emphatic: The stakes
have grown enormous since the backstory first laid the groundwork, and the
readers, having been properly prepared, are on the edge of their seats
waiting to see what will happen.
Hide what characters are thinking. If the heroine assesses the hero’s
clenched jaw and assumes he’s mad at her, and then you show him thinking
about his aching molar, the heroine doesn’t know she’s wrong, but readers
do—and all the suspense is gone from the scene. In this example from
Claire Cross’s novel Double Trouble, we see the heroine drawing
conclusions about the hero based on his backstory, but we have no idea
whether or not she’s correct:
I never could figure out why he married my sister. Unless a wife and kids
were necessary accessories for the lawyer-destined-for-Great-Things—and
she was as good a choice as any. They never seemed to have much in
common, but maybe it was something basic between them. Like lust. Marcia
used to be quite a looker, and I say that with the undue modesty of an
identical twin.
Tonight, James looked surprisingly haggard and annoyed for a man made
of granite, and as I mentioned, that expression didn’t improve when he saw

me.
“What the hell are you doing here?”
Oooh, a vulgarity. Of course, the strumpet sister had invaded the last
bastion of propriety in the Free World. That, at least, conformed to our usual
script. His job was to make sure I didn’t feel welcome enough to hang
around too long and taint the precious boys. I knew my lines by heart.
Too bad I hadn’t worn something really skimpy, just to tick him off. I
slouched harder, knowing that perfect posture was a household holy grail.
“You should be more gracious to the one doing your dirty work.”
The man glowered at me. “What are you talking about?”
“Your kids called me from the pool when no one picked them up.”
James flicked a glance up the stairs, some parental part of him clearly
reassured by the ruckus coming from the bathroom. “Where’s Marcia?”
“Where were you? Takes two for the fun part. Why should one be left
with all the work after that?”
What’s going on with James? We don’t know why he’s haggard and annoyed.
We know what conclusions the heroine has drawn—but is she correct? Why
does the heroine have a reputation as the strumpet sister? Why are these two in
so much conflict that they have a “usual script” for their interactions?
We will have to turn the page and go on if we want to find out.
LEIGH MICHAELS is the author of nearly one hundred books, including eighty contemporary
novels, three historical romance novels, and more than a dozen non-fiction books, including On
Writing Romance.

Flashbacks vs. Backstory
A flashback is a sudden, brief relocation to a previous time and then, just as suddenly, a
return to the present story. Flashbacks can hint at backstories, but they aren’t backstories
themselves. A backstory is a longer trip (in fact, sometimes backstories make up most of a
story or even a novel).

In a flashback, a character is usually reminded of something or someone from his past.
The smell of cabbage cooking might cause him to see a kitchen that he hasn’t actually seen
in years. Or you might have a character who looks over at his wife of fifty years and, in just
the right light of a nice afternoon, sees her as the teenager he married.
Flashbacks come in handy when you need to infuse a clue or two into a mystery or when
some character trait needs to be enhanced or explained. Let’s say you have a fellow in your
story who doesn’t like dogs. Your reader wants to know why, so you lead her along for a while
and then give her a nice little flashback, in which the man recalls being bitten by a dog as a
child.
Flashbacks are quick. Backstories, because they drag in the baggage of a character or a
situation, are longer.
Backstory, when layered effectively, can be a good way to establish setting and provide
description. Diverting your readers’ attention away from the here and now allows you to focus
on times and places that give deeper insight into a character or a situation.

RON ROZELLE is the author of five books, including Write Great Fiction: Description & Setting.

Focus on the Writing Life:
BALANCING WRITING WITH THE REST OF LIFE

MARRY YOUR LIFE TO YOUR WRITING
BY SHEILA BENDER
Like many aspiring writers, for years I buried my desire to write under the
activities of a busy life. I taught English and reading at a junior high school
while I studied for my graduate degree, went on to direct a day care center and
started a family. I assumed life would not allow me the time to write.
But at the libraries and bookstores my kids and I visited, volumes by
contemporary poets began falling into my hands, and I’d jot down lines of verse
that came to me. I finally decided to apply to a poetry writing workshop at the
University of Washington. I knew I could arrange my work schedule around the
class times, but I still wasn’t sure I could find time to “really” write. Once class
started, though, something miraculous happened: Writing began making its own
space in my life. Somehow, like the leaves of pioneering weeds that collect soil
for more weeds to grow, my small bits of writing attracted more time to write.
Eventually I found I’d written enough poems to apply to graduate school, and so
I did.
For two years, I wrote in my car before class started. I wrote at public parks
on the way to pick up my kids at day care. I learned how much I could
accomplish in ten or twenty minutes.
When I finished my degree and began teaching at community colleges, I
made a life-changing decision: I’d incorporate my teaching life into my writing.

My instructional writing would be as much “my writing” as what others call “my
own writing.” Pivotal in my decision not to make a distinction were lines from
Robert Hass’ poems in Praise.
In “Heroic Simile,” he writes:
The young man is thinking he would be rich if he were already rich and had
a mule.
And in “The Beginning of September,” he writes:
No one really likes the odor of geraniums, not the woman who dreams of
sunlight and is always late for work nor the man who would be happy in
altered circumstances.
I would not yearn for altered circumstances to write or shirk my responsibilities
in hopes of dreaming about sunlight. I would find patches of writing light while
performing daily tasks. I would not fantasize about how I would be rich and
famous if only I had time to go on prestigious writers’ retreats. I would create a
writing life from available resources.
You can make this commitment to your writing, too—and you can start just
like I did, by advancing your relationship with your work in four simple steps:
First, seize every opportunity to write, even if only in ten-minute snatches of
time; second, take classes and participate in writing groups; third, read, read,
read writing that resembles what you’re writing; fourth, join other writers in
organizing community readings and editing literary journals. When I did this—
and stopped making the distinction that one kind of writing was “real” and the
other less important—I wrote more, and the resulting pieces, whether for
educational publications or literary journals, informed one another.
Marrying your life to your writing means agreeing “to have and to hold from
this day forward” all parts of yourself so neither your life nor your writing
suffers unrequited love. Here are ways to say “I do” every day, and to cherish

and nurture your writing as you cherish and nurture the rest of your life
activities.

USE CREATIVE STRATEGIES TO SPEND TIME WITH
YOUR WRITING
At home or at work, you really can push everything aside for ten minutes to
write ideas for the larger work you are creating, to write passages you might use
in that work, or to do a writing exercise to develop something new.
You can find prompts for your writing everywhere. Point to a word or a
sentence in any text and write for ten minutes about whatever you (or your
character) associate to. Turn an iPod or radio on and off and use the few words
you hear as a jumping-off place for inventive writing. You can make a habit of
creating your own inspiration and have faith that the words will begin flowing
more freely as a result.
You can pay close attention to and write down what you (or characters
would) touch, smell, hear, taste, and see wherever you are sitting.
You can do all of this writing for ten minutes before leaving for lunch or in
your car by arriving ten minutes early for work. You can park a few blocks from
home at the end of the day, and stop and write. You can learn to use it to your
advantage when you have to stop midway through a piece of writing. This way,
you already have a place to start and can be more productive the next time you
sit down to write. You can keep a book of writing exercises with you to provide
prompts when a dry spell sets in. Failing pen and paper, with nothing but a cell
phone, you can take voice notes. Many associations will arise from this writing;
you’ll be surprised at how deep you can go.

SURROUND YOURSELF WITH THOSE WHO SUPPORT
YOUR RELATIONSHIP
Sign up for something social to do with writing—critique groups or workshops
(online or off), for example—for “evenings out” with this cherished partner. The

deadlines these groups supply will help prompt you to notice more places in
your life for doing your writing.
If the idea of networking with new people doesn’t appeal to you, think of
your current connections. There’s a good chance you already have a writing
buddy or two with whom you can form a small group. E-mail one another drafts
and let group members know which of their words and phrases are memorable,
and what feelings you have as you read their writing. Give feedback on what
propels you forward and what gives you pause. Share what you’d like to know
more about in the writing. It doesn’t take long to respond this way; giving and
gathering this kind of response is as exhilarating a break from chores and work
as a movie or TV show.
You might also find you can form a writing group at work and do freewriting
exercises together, perhaps meeting for breakfast or lunch once a week. Having
support in your regular commitment to your writing can help you keep it.
And the successful results of such group efforts often are quantifiable. Take
essayist Brenda Miller, who tentatively formed a writing group with two women
she’d met in a service-learning program. Their shared goal was simple: to make
more time for their writing. Miller’s essay “Swerve,” which was published in the
online literary magazine Brevity, resulted from a group prompt experience that
she describes this way: “I had to let my intuition guide me to that dangerous
place, knowing I’d be safe in the company of newfound friends.”

LOVE THE ONE YOU HAVE
Decide to enjoy whatever kind of writing you’re already doing, even if it’s all
work-related. If you write frequent e-mails to co-workers or clients, pay
attention to the details, tone, and succinct way you find to say something. If
you’re writing fiction, maybe your characters can write e-mails like you do.
Maybe they can write them like a co-worker writes them. Jot down your ideas
for how a character’s e-mails would sound. Have the character e-mail you
frequently, even daily. You can learn a lot about a character this way.

If you write reports, realize that editing for clarity and the use of precise
language is an exercise in revision that is helpful in all types of writing. Realize,
too, that you can use forms of writing you already know in order to develop your
characters. Let them write reports on events in their lives; you’ll learn more
about them. You also can use the tone of your reports for personal essays or
articles by taking a lesson from Russell Baker’s entertaining essay “The Plot
Against People,” in which the author adopts the persona of a professor lecturing
on the ambitions of inanimate objects. Baker begins:
Inanimate objects are classified into three major categories—those that don’t
work, those that break down and those that get lost.
The goal of all inanimate objects is to resist man and ultimately to defeat him,
and the three major classifications are based on the method each object uses to
achieve its purpose. As a general rule, any object capable of breaking down at
the moment when it is most needed will do so. The automobile is typical of the
category.
By applying an instructional tone to a relatable topic, Baker effectively
created a piece that strikes a chord with readers about the frustrations we all face
with the things in our lives.
Think you can’t apply your own work-related writing skills to your creative
writing in a similar way? You can. A special-education teacher I know felt the
only writing she knew how to do was for Individualized Education Plans (IEPs).
She wanted to do some personal writing but felt she knew nothing of the craft.
So, I suggested she write herself an IEP. The result was brilliant: Her IEP for
how she would manage and flourish in her coming retirement had a roomful of
people laughing at the way she described herself and the ways her family could
support her life change.
You can find a way to do this no matter what you do. If you’re an expert in a
process or product you’ve learned on the job, you might write (and perhaps even
sell) an instructional article on the topic for laypeople. If you’re a waitress, use

the order pad you have to write about your life. What would you order up for
your day?
If the writing you’re doing is making up stories for your children or
grandchildren, or blogging about a topic you find interesting, you may not even
realize you’re creating writing that can become fodder for pieces you might
submit to magazines and other markets. Nurse Kate Bracy started a free blog on
Open Salon (opensalon.com) as a way of writing personal essays to self-imposed
deadlines. Soon, one of her essays earned the “Editors’ pick” designation, and an
agent approached her to write a book proposal, which she did.
As Bracy says, “Of course, the movie Julie & Julia is also based on [a Salon]
blog. But the lesson isn’t to blog on Salon. The lesson is to write.” Even if you
write only e-mails most of the time, think about how they might be reinvented.
They’re a well you can draw from to write about your life and knowledge.
Think of all the writing you do as skills building, format providing, and
information gathering. Don’t waste time wishing for altered circumstances. You
support your family, your community and yourself with your work and your
activities; you can support your writing, too.
By considering everything you write your “own writing” and starting from
the forms you’re most practiced in, you’ll learn to get into a writing mind-set
quickly and without resistance while you fill your box of craft tools.
SHEILA BENDER’S most recent book is A New Theology: Turning to Poetry in a Time of Grief.
She publishes an online magazine at writingitreal.com.

THE WRITE-AT-HOME MOM
BY CHRISTINA KATZ
The challenges of raising kids and a career under one roof are impossible to
enumerate. So it’s a good thing so many parents are experts at finding rhythms
and routines that work best for everyone in the family. The questions that are

good for the kids are good for the mama (and papa), too: What would simplify
your morning routine? When do you feel most productive? What shortcuts
would help you set aside more time to write?
The answers to these questions are a start, but—as you well know—family
life can be a tad unpredictable, and those “routines” can fly out the window
before the ink dries on your well-meaning to-do list. So I’ve put together some
concrete ideas for plucking spare moments to write between child
duties/activities. Morning, noon, or night, the time is there—you just have to
know where to look.
For starters, break your weekly tasks down in advance, based on what you
think you can accomplish in the amount of time your kids will be occupied.
(Sunday night is a good time to do this.) For example: A beginning writer might
plan to write one article per week during the times her kids watch Sesame Street.
As the week unfolds, keep in mind the following breakdown of potential writing
moments.

MORNINGS: RISE AND WRITE
GET UP EARLIER: I know, I know—this has never been a very popular
suggestion. But it doesn’t have to be painful. Perhaps you and your spouse could
trade off night and morning duties, so you can get to bed earlier on some nights.
In other words, your spouse oversees the bedtime routine, and you oversee the
morning routine—after you get in an hour of early-morning writing.
SKIP THE BUSY WORK: If morning is your most mentally productive time
of day, don’t waste your energy on things that could just as easily be done later:
folding laundry, talking on the phone, making grocery lists.
PRE-PREP MEALS: Prepare lunches, set the table for breakfast, set up the
coffee machine and put out the nonperishable foods the night before. Making
this a habit will better prepare you to meet your day while giving you precious
extra time during the hectic morning hours.

TAILOR TO FIT: Create morning routines to suit each family member’s
personality so they’ll be self-directed and leave you to your writing. For
example, your six-year-old may love to pick out her clothes the night before and
lay them out for the next day, but your teenager may view this as a major
violation of his rights. No need to micromanage; just help each child find a
system that works. The operative word here is works.
TURN ON THE TV: Of course, moderation is the key, but you can use
television, VCRs, and DVDs as part of a regular routine to carve out writing
time. Remind everyone involved that watching television is a special treat. Let
the kids know you’ll be working while they watch but that you’re available if
they really, really need you. Explain that you expect them to behave and give
them a preview of what’s coming next. For example: After Arthur, we’ll take a
walk to the park (or have a play date, or color, etc.).
MULTITASK: Don’t forget morning activities that give you a little time here
and there. Can you get a few notes written in the waiting room at a doctor’s
appointment or during children’s classes or activities? Some groups require your
participation, but others, especially after toddler age, don’t. I recently roughed
out several pages while my daughter was in a morning dance class, and those
pages came faster and more easily than anything I wrote in my office that day.

AFTERNOONS: EVERYBODY RECHARGE
LET ’EM EAT SLOWLY: At lunchtime, toddlers can be notoriously slow. If
you’re blessed with a pokey or picky one, make use of the time you spend sitting
at the kitchen table. Keep a notepad handy and pull it out after you serve lunch
for brainstorming ideas while the kids eat.
GET A HEAD START: If you have kids of various ages at home, lunchtime
probably isn’t going to yield any literary breakthroughs. If you spend your time
wisely at lunch, however, you can earn time before or after dinner when backup

(your spouse or older children) arrives. So go ahead and set the table for dinner
after lunch, get the recipes and ingredients out for dinner and, if possible, get a
jump-start on preparation while everyone’s still finishing their lunches.
DECLARE QUIET TIME: If you’re really lucky, your child’s naps afford you
valuable extra work time. But even if you don’t have a napper, you can declare
an hour or so of quiet time in the afternoon. During quiet time, all children must
go to their rooms, play quietly and leave mommy alone (unless it’s urgent, of
course).
REST UP: Alternately, you can go ahead and take a nap yourself during quiet
time so you’ll have more energy to write in the evening. Just crash with your
kids or find a resting spot within earshot of their stirring. You’ll be more
energized in the evenings even if you don’t actually fall asleep.

EVENINGS: WRING OUT EVERY SECOND
HOMEWORK FOR EVERYONE: If you have older kids, they likely have
homework. While they work, you can work. Or they may have practices, Girl
Scouts, or other activities that allow you some quiet time. And if you have very
young children, chances are they go to bed fairly early, which can open up your
evening hours.
STRETCH IT OUT: After dinner, you may want to just get to your desk and
get straight to work—but a fifteen-minute power walk around the block, a quick
dance, or a big stretch will help you revitalize yourself so you can work more
efficiently.
EASE IN: Once you sit down, set a timer for twenty minutes and do something
easy or fun right off the bat. Type up a funny anecdote from your day. Or rough
out an inspirational article. Go in a direction that feels easiest for you or that you
associate with warming up. Then, when the timer rings, you’ll be ready to ring

out some nitty-gritty research for an article or edit the draft of your personal
essay for the zillionth time.
STAY IN THE ZONE: When the sitcom laughter from another room starts to
lure you away from work, grab your timer again, but this time for the tough
stuff. Here’s how it works: Respond to e-mails—twenty minutes—go! Draft
article—twenty minutes—go! Proofread yesterday’s draft, plan for next week—
you can get a lot done in short bursts if you practice working that way.

LATE NIGHT: THE LAST REFUGE
Writer Heather Sharfeddin awoke in the middle of the night with the idea for her
first published novel, Blackbelly. Fortunately she’d been dealing with insomnia
long enough to already be in the habit of shuffling to her computer, where she’d
write until sleep beckoned her back to bed. For some mamas, late-night hours
are the best you can get. But hey, you can still make it work. Just be sure to get
the rest you need to function the next morning.
CHRISTINA KATZ has written over two hundred articles for magazines, newspapers, and online
publications. She is the author of Writer Mama, Get Known Before the Book Deal, and The
Writer’s Workout.

Part 5
DIALOGUE:
What Your Characters Say to Each
Other

Chapter 26

AMP UP DIALOGUE WITH EMOTIONAL BEATS
BY TODD A. STONE
Dialogue benefits from variety. To maintain your reader’s interest, insert a
variety of beats into your dialogue. Beats are descriptions of physical action—
minor or major—that fall between lines of speech. Try these techniques to punch
up your dialogue.

USE FACIAL EXPRESSIONS
When a character raises an eyebrow or furrows his brow, this action, or beat,
interrupts the dialogue and telegraphs a change in the character’s emotional
state. As an exchange progresses and the emotional intensity rises—as the
character’s dissatisfaction grows into anger, for instance—he might set his jaw,
bite his lip, or narrow his gaze. His eyes may darken, his face may redden, his
nostrils may flare, and so on. These are all conventional and commonly
understood signs of anger. You can read a dozen clinical texts on which facial
expressions most strongly signal which emotion, or you can watch a few good
dramatic films or TV shows with the sound off. It won’t take you long to see
how the actors use facial expressions to signal emotion.

MAKE THEM TALK WITH THEIR HANDS
Characters can point, steeple their fingers, clench their hands into fists, pound
tables, hold their hands up to surrender, cross their arms in front of their chests,
throw up their hands in resignation or despair (though this gesture is much
overused), or twiddle their thumbs (does anyone actually do that?). In the
following example from the best-selling novel Wonder Boys, notice how author

Michael Chabon instills movement and tension into the dialogue simply by
focusing on what college student James Leer is holding:
“It’s a fake,” said James Leer, holding out his hand to me, palm upward.
Upon it lay a tiny silver pistol, a “ladies’ model” with a pearl handle, no
bigger than a deck of cards. “Hello, Professor Tripp.”
“Hello, James,” I said. “I didn’t know what you were doing out here.”
“It’s my mother’s,” he said. “She won it in a penny arcade in Baltimore,
in one of those machines with the claw. When she was in Catholic school. It
used to shoot these little paper caps, but you can’t find the right kind
anymore.”
“Why do you carry it around?” I said, reaching for it.
“I don’t know.” His fingers closed around the little gun and he slipped it
back into the pocket of his overcoat. “I found it in a drawer at home and I
just started carrying it around. For good luck, I guess.”

ADD MOVEMENT
Your characters can cross the room or push back from a desk or table to get
physical and emotional distance from a heated conversation, an intimate
moment, or even another character. They can move in closer to become more
threatening or more intimate, or to drive a point home. If a character puts a piece
of furniture or some other object between himself and someone else, that’s a
clear signal that he’s blocking the other character—emotionally, physically, or
intellectually, depending upon the nature of your scene. Use movement to
support and enhance your dialogue, and your readers will pick up on all this and
more.
It’s not hard to spot the building hostility in this exchange from Khaled
Hosseini’s novel The Kite Runner.
“Amir agha and I are friends,” Hassan said. He looked flushed.

“Friends?” Assef said, laughing. “You pathetic fool! Someday you’ll
wake up from your little fantasy and learn just how good of a friend he is.
Now, bas! Enough of this. Give us that kite.”
Hassan stooped and picked up a rock.
Assef flinched. He began to take a step back, stopped. “Last chance,
Hazara.”
Hassan’s answer was to cock the arm that held the rock.
“Whatever you wish.” Assef unbuttoned his winter coat, took it off,
folded it slowly and deliberately. He placed it against the wall.

DON’T FORGET THE BIG STUFF
If it’s within your character’s personality, don’t be afraid to have him take big
actions—throw a fit, throw a plate, or throw a punch. And don’t hesitate to skip
the buildup if a character’s personality demands it. If your character has a hairtrigger temper, bypass any eyebrow raising and go straight to breaking the
furniture.
Make sure the actions you choose are consistent with your character’s traits.
Every action should be a reflection of the character’s objectives and emotions,
and of the scene. If your character seldom shows emotion, focus on small details
that show his true feelings leaking out: a tightening around his eyes, a deliberate
forcefulness in each step as he walks across the room, a tense grip on a pen.
Beats like these make it easier for your reader to see and feel the emotion in
your dialogue. Render your characters’ words with care—and then do everything
you can to make them shine.
TODD A. STONE award-winning screenwriter and author of Novelist’s Bootcamp. He’s the head
writer for the interactive mystery website Crime Scene www.crimescene.com.

Editing Your Dialogue
If dialogue stops or delays your novel’s progress toward resolving the conflict, it must be cut,
pared down, or rewritten. Your characters don’t want to wait through an unnecessary

conversation, and neither do your readers. Look for these areas in your manuscript.
Opening Niceties
In real speech, we open most conversations with introductions and small talk. In fiction, these
introductions and small talk do nothing but get in the way:
“Good morning, Sam.”
“Morning, Wally.”
“How are you?”
“Fine. Nice looking day today, isn’t it?”
Sam and Wally may soon reveal their needs in conflict, but why wait? Cut the niceties and get
to it:
“Good morning, Sam.”
“It would be, if I didn’t have to look at your backstabbing face so early.”
There’s no waiting and no doubt at all what the conflict is here.
Pauses to Think
In real speech, we use filler words or sounds to buy time to think about what to say next.
In dialogue, words like well, ahem, ah, and uh dilute the conflict and get in the way of its
progression. If your character needs to stall for time, have her do something that signals her
need to stall or her reluctance to answer:
“What’s the status of the Corbin Project?” said Al.
Linda bit her lip and looked down at the floor. An eternity of tense seconds passed.
“There are serious problems.”
“Unsatisfactory. I told you I wanted that project straightened out by now.”
Here the conflict is intense, the action moves fast, and we know Linda is in hot water.
Echoes
In real speech we use echoes to ensure understanding, to buy time to form a reply, or to
continue a conversation.
Pat said, “I went to see Fred today.”
“You saw Fred, did you?” said Lois.
“Yes, I saw Fred. We talked about the Jackson case.”
“You discussed the Jackson case? What for?”
Rewriting to delete the echoes and to foreground the conflict yields a much more intense
passage.

“I saw Fred today,” Pat said. “We talked about the Jackson case.”
“You had no right to do that,” said Lois.
Give your readers what they want and give it to them fast. Use echoes, fillers and niceties in
your draft if you must to prime your writing, but make sure you take them out later, before
they drag down your reader.

Chapter 27

WEAVE ACTION, NARRATIVE, & DIALOGUE
BY GLORIA KEMPTON
Most of the time, we want to balance our scenes using three elements of fiction:
dialogue, action, and narrative. This is one reason you want to put your character
in a scene with other characters as often as possible. Scenes that weave together
these three elements engage the reader at an emotional level much more
effectively than scenes that are only dialogue, only narrative, or only action.
The following is an example of a well-woven scene from Sue Monk Kidd’s
The Secret Life of Bees. In this scene, Kidd seems to want to talk to us about the
risk of getting “stung” if we want to be true beekeepers. If we want to make a
difference in the world, we must take risks, and loving something is enough
reason to do it. Rather than “preach” to us through narrative alone, the author
blends the scene using dialogue, action, and narrative, pulling the reader in.
Rescuing bees took us the entire morning. Driving back into remote corners
of the woods where there were barely roads, we would come upon 25
beehives up on slats like a little lost city tucked back in there. We lifted the
covers and filled the feeders with sugar water. Earlier we’d spooned dry
sugar into our pockets, and now, just as a bonus, we sprinkled it on the
feeding rims.
I managed to get stung on my wrist while replacing a lid onto a hive box.
August scraped out the stinger.
“I was sending them love,” I said, feeling betrayed.
August said, “Hot weather makes the bees out of sorts, I don’t care how
much love you send them.” She pulled a small bottle of olive oil and bee

pollen from her free pocket and rubbed my skin—her patented remedy. It
was something I’d hoped never to test out.
“Count yourself initiated,” she said. “You can’t be a true beekeeper
without getting stung.”
A true beekeeper. The words caused a fullness in me, and right at that
moment an explosion of blackbirds lifted off the ground in a clearing a short
distance away and filled up the whole sky. I said to myself, Will wonders
never cease? I would add that to my list of careers. A writer, an English
teacher and a beekeeper.
“Do you think I could keep bees one day?” I asked.
August said, “Didn’t you tell me this past week one of the things you
loved was bees and honey? Now, if that’s so, you’ll be a fine beekeeper.
Actually, you can be bad at something, Lily, but if you love doing it, that will
be enough.”
The sting shot pain all the way to my elbow, causing me to marvel at how
much punishment a minuscule creature can inflict. I’m prideful enough to
say I didn’t complain. After you get stung, you can’t get unstung no matter
how much you whine about it. I just dived back into the riptide of saving
bees.
How did Kidd know when and where to put what? This is largely an intuitive
process, and I’m guessing she didn’t do a lot of thinking about how she was
weaving the elements of fiction as she was writing her first draft. You have to
move inside of your characters in order to do this. You can’t be thinking about
how to do it, at least not while writing the first draft. During the revision process,
when reading back through the story, you can see better when a scene is topheavy with dialogue, narrative, or action. The perfectly balanced scene has a
rhythm to it; you’ll learn to recognize it when it’s there.

KEEPING TALK IN THE FOREGROUND

Having said all that, knowing when to only focus on one element is as important
as learning to weave them all together. Is it ever a good thing to create a scene
with only dialogue? Only narrative? Only action?
If you want to highlight a particular character trait in your viewpoint
character or focus on something specific that the characters are talking about,
you don’t want the scene cluttered, the reader distracted, or the pace slowed by
action or narrative. You know how sometimes when someone is telling you a
story, the setting, the other people around you, everything just kind of fades
away, and you’re intent only on what the other person is saying? This is what it’s
like when you cut away action and narrative and leave only your characters’
spoken words.
Check out this scene in The Feast of Love by Charles Baxter. The viewpoint
character, Bradley, works at a coffee shop called Jitters. His co-worker, Chloe,
asks him what’s the worst thing that ever happened to him. Up until that time,
the author had woven dialogue, narrative, and action into a nicely balanced
scene, but it was time to speed things up. Bradley starts to tell Chloe about how
he and some buddies were in the cathedral at Notre Dame in Paris. The story’s
getting long and Chloe tells him to hurry it up. What the author wants to
highlight here is that Bradley actually thinks the worst thing he’s ever done in his
life is knock over a bunch of candles in a cathedral. The dialogue focuses on this
alone:
“Let me finish this story … and because my hand was shaking, I reached
down to the holder, this freestanding holder or candelabra or whatever of
votive candles, and somehow, I don’t know how this happened, my hand
caused this holder of candles, all these small flames, all these souls, to fall
over, and when it fell over, all the candles, lit for the sake of a soul
somewhere, there must have been a hundred of them, all of them fell to the
floor, because of me, and all of them went out. And you know what the nun
did, Chloe, the nun who was standing there?”

“She spoke French?”
“No. She could have, but she didn’t. No, what she did was, she
screamed.”
“Wow.”
“Yeah, the nun screamed in my face. I felt like …”
“You felt like pretty bad, Mr. S., I can believe it. But you know, Mr. S,
those were just candles. They weren’t really souls. That’s all superstition,
that soul stuff.”
“Oh, I know.”
“No kidding, Mr. S., you shouldn’t be so totally morbid. I thought when
you were telling me about the worst thing you ever did, it’d be, like, beating
up a blind guy and stealing his car.”
“No, I never did that.”
“Oscar did, once. You should get him to tell you about it.”
“Okay.”
“He was drunk, though.” She prettily touches her perfect hair. “And the
guy wasn’t really blind. He just said he was, to take advantage of people. It
was, like, a scam. Oscar saw through all that. It’s nine o’clock now, Boss. We
should open up.”
“Right.” And I unlock the curtain, and touch a switch, and slowly the
curtain rises on the working day. The candles are nothing to Chloe; they’re
just candles. I feel instantly better. Bless her.
The scene wouldn’t have had the same impact if the author had woven action
and narrative throughout the dialogue. This is a neurotic character, and this fastpaced scene of dialogue shows the extent of his neurosis, especially compared to
Chloe’s explanation of the candles being just candles. Because this part of the
scene is only dialogue, we get the full impact of his neurosis and how it
expresses itself in his life. When you isolate a character’s dialogue, if the reader
is paying attention, he’ll become privy to the character’s personality and motives

in a way that’s not possible in the woven scene just because there’s too much
going on.
It can take the protagonist pages to tell us something in narrative, whereas a
scene of dialogue can quickly show us through that character’s own words said
out loud. Narrative explains, and dialogue blurts out.

PACING YOUR SCENES
Pacing is probably the most common fiction element to pay attention to when
considering when and when not to weave dialogue, narrative, and action. If
you’re creating a fast-paced conflict scene between two or more people, you
might do well to consider only dialogue, at least for parts of it. In Wally Lamb’s
She’s Come Undone, the young viewpoint character, Dolores, is fed up with her
mother, who has been grieving over the loss of her baby for more than four years
and has acquired all kinds of obsessive-compulsive disorders, the most recent
being an obsession with her new parakeet, Petey. Dolores has already been
narrating a lot of this, but now it’s time for her to act out her feelings. In a scene
of dialogue, the author quickly shows what Dolores has taken pages to tell us:
I hated Petey—fantasized about his flying accidentally out a window or into
the electric fan so that his spell over Ma would be broken. My not kissing
Ma anymore was a conscious decision reached one night at bedtime with the
purpose of hurting her.
“Well, you’re stingy tonight,” she said when I turned my face away from
her goodnight kiss.
“I’m not kissing you anymore, period,” I told her. “All day long you kiss
that bird right on its filthy beak.”
“I do not.”
“You do so. Maybe you want to catch bird diseases, but I don’t.”
“Petey’s mouth is probably cleaner than my mouth and yours put
together, Dolores,” was her argument.

“That’s a laugh.”
“Well, it’s true. I read it in my bird book.”
“Next thing you know, you’ll be French-kissing it.”
“Never mind French-kissing. What do you know about that kind of stuff?
You watch that mouth of yours, young lady.”
“That’s exactly what I’m doing,” I said. I clamped my hand over my
mouth and stuffed my whole face into the pillow.
As you can see, this passage is very effective without a bunch of narrative
bogging down the moment. The dialogue here shows Dolores’ true attitude
toward Petey, but more important, it demonstrates her feelings toward her
mother. This is dialogue at its most powerful. It can take the protagonist pages to
tell us something in narrative, whereas a scene of dialogue can quickly show us
through that character’s own words said out loud. Narrative explains, and
dialogue blurts out.
Similar reasoning applies when writing scenes with only narrative or only
action. You want to focus on something in your character’s mind or describe
something that would only sound contrived in dialogue, so you use straight
narrative. Or the action needs to drive the scene forward because it’s intense and
emotional, and your characters just wouldn’t be talking during this time.
Sometimes, as in real life, there’s just nothing to say at the moment. Always,
always, always let your characters lead you.

STRIKING A BALANCE
There are no hard-and-fast rules about when and when not to blend dialogue,
action, and narrative. To weave them together well is to find your story’s rhythm.
But there are a few questions you can ask yourself about your story, especially in
the rewrite stage, that can help you know which elements are most effective for a
particular scene, and which might be better used elsewhere.
Ask yourself:

Is the story moving a little too slowly, and do I need to speed things up?
(Use dialogue.)
Is it time to give the reader some background on the characters so they’re
more sympathetic? (Use narrative, dialogue, or a combination of the two.)
Do I have too many dialogue scenes in a row? (Use action or narrative.)
Are my characters constantly confiding in others about things they should
only be pondering in their minds? (Use narrative.)
Likewise, are my characters alone in their heads when my characters in
conversation would be more effective and lively? (Use dialogue.)
Is my story top-heavy in any way at all—too much dialogue, too much
narrative, or too much action? (Insert more of the elements that are
missing.)
Are my characters providing too many background details as they’re talking
to each other? (Use narrative.)
Whether we’re using dialogue, action, or narrative to move the story forward,
any or all three of these elements are doing double duty by revealing our
characters’ motives. Your story’s dialogue can reveal motive in a way that’s
natural and authentic, because whether we’re aware of it or not, we reveal our
own motives all the time in our everyday lives.
And to understand a character’s motive is to understand the character.
GLORIA KEMPTON is the author of ten books, including Write Great Fiction: Dialogue.

Creating Three-Dimensional Scenes
Choose a scene from your own work or one you want to add to your story. Practice writing the
same scene over and over. Use all dialogue the first time. Then use all narrative. Then all
action. Finally, weave all three fiction elements for a three-dimensional effect.
Pull a troublesome scene from your own story. Which element does it have too much of?
Too little of? Consider how you might weave all three elements to make it more threedimensional.

Take a look at some of your woven scenes and see if you can speed them up by taking
out all of the narrative and using only dialogue. Or slow them down by taking out the dialogue
and using only narrative. Maybe a scene should be focused on the action alone, for the sake
of moving the external plot forward. Remember that not every scene needs to be woven to be
effective.

Chapter 28

AVOID
WRITING
CONVERSATIONS

SAME-OLD,

SAME-OLD

BY MICHAEL LEVIN

1. KEEP YOUR CHARACTERS IGNORANT
Casting director Michael Shurtleff makes a fascinating point in his book
Audition that applies equally to actors and to writers. He says that actors
sometimes play a scene as if they know the scene’s ending before it happens.
For instance, at the climax of one particular scene in a Tennessee Williams’
play, an insane person puts out a cigarette in the palm of the hand of the nurse
who’s trying to help her. But the nurse, according to Shurtleff, wrongly played
the whole scene as if she didn’t like the patient.
Shurtleff told the actress playing the nurse, “If you treat the patient really
nicely and kindly throughout the scene, and you show the audience you like her
and you’re trying to help her, it’s a thousand times more powerful if she then
turns around and puts that cigarette out in your palm.”
And that makes sense. Even though you know how the scene will end before
you start to write it, don’t let your characters act or speak as if they know where
it’s going. Preserve surprise and the scene will be a thousand times more
powerful.

2. BECOME THE CHARACTER
Amy Tan says that when she writes dialogue, she stares at her shoes until
suddenly she becomes the character. Her dialogue is superb. So try to find a pair
of Amy Tan’s shoes on eBay, and you’ll be published almost instantly.

3. IT’S NOT A TRANSCRIPT
Excellent dialogue sometimes just happens, but most of the time, we have to sit
there for a while until we get exactly the right words we want. So take it slowly
when you’re writing dialogue. Remember that you’re not a court stenographer,
charged with getting down every single word the characters might say. Instead
you just have to report, or include, the dialogue that’s most important to the
story.

4. MAKE EVERY WORD COUNT
The first page of Amy Tan’s The Joy Luck Club contains the following lines of
dialogue:
[Mother:] “Auntie Lin cooked red bean soup for Joy Luck. I’m going to cook
black sesame-seed soup.”
[Daughter:] “Don’t show off.”
Do you see what the daughter’s three little words did? (1) They tell us that the
mother is obviously showing off her cooking skills by one-upping Auntie Lin;
(2) They tell us that the relationship between the mother and daughter is
combative; (3) They show us the nature of the daughter: She’s hard sometimes.
She isn’t always nice. All that information about character in three little words.
Fantastic. The mother then comes back with the third and last line of dialogue in
the scene:
“It’s not showoff.”
Clearly, the mother feels hurt. And the running together of the two words (show
off becomes showoff) demonstrates that the mother isn’t a native English
speaker. Through this short exchange, Tan shows the reader a lot about her
characters. The author provides the evidence through dialogue and the reader
draws the conclusions.

5. REALISTIC DIALOGUE INVOLVES RISING CONFLICT
In Lajos Egri’s book The Art of Dramatic Writing, the author describes three
kinds of conflict:
1. STATIC. Nothing happens. The story is no further along at the end of the
scene than it was at the beginning. It’s blah.
2. JUMPING. We leap from setup to resolution without the intervening steps.
This gives the reader mental whiplash.
3. RISING CONFLICT. (The kind you want.) The confrontation heats up
little by little to an inexorable conclusion.
You want rising conflict in every scene. And you get it by notching up the
tension, or the comedy, with each successive line of dialogue. It sounds hard in
theory, but it isn’t. Think about the last argument you had with someone.
Chances are it started with a tense moment, grew and grew in intensity, and then
whammo— big-time conflict. If you think of writing good dialogue as being as
easy as getting into an argument with someone, you’re all set.

6. MORE ON WHY LESS IS MORE
When you watch any film, or read any story, notice that there’s about as much
dialogue in it as there is in any dream you have. This is why I strongly advocate
going back to a movie you liked within a few days, just to see how it worked.
One of the discoveries I always make is that the scenes are much shorter—and
the dialogue less wordy—than I remembered.

7. WRITING DIALOGUE IS A MULTIDRAFT THING
In the first draft, just get the basic words down. In the second draft, make it
sound exactly the way the character would speak.

8. YES, YOU CAN USE ADVERBS—JUDICIOUSLY

Remember at all times that the reader isn’t “reading” your story or novel. She’s
using it as a script in which she’s playing the part of the main character—and
every other character. So be sure that she understands exactly how to give the
right reading to every line.
Most of the time, the reader should be able to tell how to read a line of
dialogue just from the dialogue. But if it’s not exactly clear, then, by all means,
use an adverb.

9. AVOID REPEATING WHAT THE READER ALREADY
KNOWS
For example:
“Why do you think Ellen killed him?” Margaret asked.
John summarized what the policeman had just told him. “It looks like
Ellen’s our woman,” he concluded.
Obviously the scene that preceded this one was between John and the policeman.
So we don’t need John repeating everything to us that we just saw and heard.

10. STICK TO PEOPLE YOU KNOW
Make sure that your Southerners, mobsters, or foreigners sound real. You
wouldn’t forgive an author who made his characters sound foolish or
stereotypical. So don’t expect your reader to stand for it, either.
Agatha Christie, in her autobiography, wrote that in a hundred or more
novels she never once described three workmen sitting in a pub, because she
never sat with three workmen in a pub and she didn’t know what they talked
about. If it’s okay for Agatha Christie to stick to her knitting, it’s okay for you to
stick to yours.

11. WHEN REWRITING DIALOGUE …

Read the scene aloud or, better still, into a tape recorder. Fiction writers may tell
themselves that they’ll “get around” to rewriting the dialogue, yet sometimes
they never do. The best advice I ever got about rewriting dialogue came from
Bob Asahina, my former editor at Simon & Schuster. Asahina had me read an
entire novel draft into a tape recorder, so that I’d have to speak aloud every
single line of dialogue in the manuscript.
When you have to speak your own dialogue, you suddenly know which lines
need attention and which lines are fine. Stilted dialogue is a deal killer in the
minds of most agents and publishers.

12. IF IT AIN’T BROKE, DON’T FIX IT
Sometimes you write a great line of dialogue and say to yourself, “Boy, that’s
good.” The second time you look at it, you smile. The third time, you stare at it.
The fourth time, you change it.
Did the line get less good? No, it just got more familiar to you. If you write a
great line, resist the urge to “improve” on it. Trust your taste.
MICHAEL LEVIN has co-written, edited, or created more than ninety books. He is a New York
Times Bestseller and runs www.businessghost.com.

Focus on the Writing Life:
MAXIMIZING YOUR PRODUCTIVITY

REINVENTING YOUR RELATIONSHIP WITH TIME
BY SAGE COHEN
The universal chorus of complaint from writers of all stripes seems to be: not
enough time. Let’s investigate how our relationship with time is moving us
forward and holding us back.
We all get the same twenty-four hours in a day. What you do with yours is up
to you. You may believe that you have “no time,” but the fact is, you have just as
much time as anyone else. What varies for every writer is our unique mix of
work and family responsibilities, financial commitments, sleep requirements,
physical and emotional space for writing, and perhaps most importantly, our
ability and willingness to prioritize writing in this mix.
Writers make time for writing. And everyone does it her own way. Your job
is to find your way.

BE CONSCIOUS OF YOUR TIME
The best way to get a handle on how much authority you actually have over your
time is to start becoming aware of how you are spending your time.
Pay attention to how you’re investing your time today, and you’ll develop a
clear picture of the mix of mandatory and voluntary activities that shape your
days. Once you become conscious that your relationship with time is not
something that happens to you but a dynamic orchestrated by you through dozens

of large and small choices you make every day, you can evaluate whether you
would like to choose to continue the pattern you are in or to create a new one.

HONOR YOUR RHYTHMS
Honor your biorhythms by planning your writing time for the part of the day
you’re most capable of doing it. For example, my friend Chloe De Segonzac just
wrote to say that she’s learned that waking up at 6:00 A.M. to write an important
sex scene is not the way to go for her. It’s hard to feel steamywhen she’s
overwhelmed with sleepy.
I’m restless in the mornings and do my most focused work later in the day.
Because I am fortunate to work for myself, from home, I have the flexibility to
shape my time in a way that works for me. My schedule is always fluxing to
accommodate changing workflow and family needs, but these days it generally
looks something like this:
I’m with my young son until the late morning or midday, at which point
someone else in the house cares for him. Once I put on my work hat, I’ll
participate in any client calls or meetings, business development opportunities,
and such during the early hours of the work day. When I’m teaching, I find that I
am able to focus and respond to student work very well at any time of the day.
Nonfiction books and poetry and essays and everything that is being generated
from the depths of my being and written onto the page generally happen in the
evenings after my son is asleep.
Having transitioned from college directly to a series of office jobs, I had no
idea what my biorhythms for different kinds of work were until I attended
graduate school, where I had the flexibility to experiment with the various
elements of my schedule. Chances are good that you’ve been in whatever life
rhythm you’re currently in for a good long while. This means you may not have
any idea what might work best for you. Get ready to find out!
Define Your Prime Time

This is your invitation to start experimenting with your own sense of prime
writing time. Right now. Does your cup overflow with imagery with that first
coffee on the drive into work, or are you tapping the revelation vein at two in the
morning when you can prowl in the shadows? Or maybe you’re an “anytime is
fine for me” kind of writer.
Do you need a six-hour chunk of uninterrupted time to really hit your stride,
or can you make good progress during lunch break, standing in line at the post
office, and waiting for your dentist appointment? How can you create more of
the time-of-day and time-to-work intervals suited to your writing rhythms? No
one can answer these questions but you, and even you may not have an informed
answer yet. But soon, if you commit to finding out, you will.
Work With What You Have
I have just implored you to define your ideal writing times and patterns. And
I meant it. But now, with equal emphasis, I would like to insist that you dig deep
to define the scope of what’s possible right this very minute.
Today I am able to shape my workdays. But for many years, I was not.
Despite the fact that it was not optimal for me to have my butt-in-chair in the
morning (and it absolutely withered my soul to be in an office), there I was
doing exactly that—sitting at a desk from 8:30 A.M. until at least 6:00 P.M. So I
made the best of it and worked with the margins I had. I carried a notebook when
walking my dog in the mornings. I went to live music cafés in the evenings, in
my pajamas, and while the people around me drank beer and sloshed about in
time to the music, I filled pages with music coming through me in words.
In short, I refused to let a meaningless, demanding job deplete my creative
stores. I insisted that my heart stay open to poetry and wrote myself awake every
time my muse started to wander off looking for someone more reliable to haunt.
I made writing my “everything else” around work, blended it with eating and
entertainment and social time and care of my animals, and felt integrated,
inspired, whole.

What are you doing right now to make the most of the time you do have,
even if it’s not your prime time? Start there, and experiment with how you might
do a little more of it, and then a little more.

YOU HAVE THE REST OF YOUR LIFE
My computer monitor looks like a root system for sticky notes; it has become
host to the layers and layers of pastel-posted ideas and to-dos that I scribble and
stick as they flit through my mind while working. The accumulation of such
notes creates a feeling of clutter, but more uncomfortably a sinking feeling that
there will simply not be enough hours in my life to accomplish everything I want
to do. But I know better.
Several years ago, I took a workshop called “Falling Awake” with Dave
Ellis. One of the preliminary assignments we were asked to do to prepare for the
class was to chart out our major life goals for each area of our life in five-year
segments. I defined my major areas as: health, finances, family, work,
spirituality, and writing. And I brainstormed a mighty comprehensive list in each
area.
I was thirty-four years old and single at the time. Based on longevity of my
family members, I estimated that I’d be alive with my thinking cap on until at
least age eighty-five. This gave me ten, five-year sets of time.
I dove into this exercise and was intently focused on plotting out
conservatively realistic deadlines for my overwhelming list of goals throughout a
fifty-year time spread when suddenly I came up empty-handed. Having arrived
at age seventy I had run out of goals. Everything I could possibly imagine that I
might want to do in my life was accomplished. Imagine that! And I still had
fifteen years to work with, give or take the unpredictable bargain of mortality.
What would life be like if you felt assured that there was plenty of time for
every writing goal (and every life goal) on your dance card? What would you
write (or not write) with fifteen gift years?

Make a “Rest-of-My-Life Plan” and Plot Your Possibilities
The common wisdom is, “Live like you’re going to die tomorrow.” My
variation on this theme for writers is, “Write like you have the rest of your life
ahead of you.” And make your own rest-of-my-life plan to help you conceive the
general shape and scope of what is possible.
With this big picture of your future sprawling out before you in measurable
increments, you’ll know far better whether you’re aiming too high or leaving a
purposeless decade or two dangling.
Don’t worry, this plan isn’t fixed in stone. So much happens in life that we
can neither predict nor control. This is simply a way to estimate your capacity to
inhabit the time you are given with the intentions you have chosen. It’s just
another way of reassuring yourself that you have all day.

PROCRASTINATE PRODUCTIVELY
So you don’t feel like writing. Or you’re stuck on something and can’t go any
further right now. Or you’re too tired or broke or can’t find your pink slipper.
Okay. You are excused. I don’t do that stern schoolteacher, butt-in-chair guilt
trip. In fact, I’ve sworn off guilt trips altogether. So how, you may wonder, is this
woman going to convince me to keep up all of that good, earnest writing work?
She’s not.
What I have come to trust from more than a decade of firsthand experience is
that when we feel backed into a corner, we will rebel. So the more we try to
force ourselves to write, the more we will resist, the less we will write, and the
more frustrated and despairing we will become.
I would like to propose an alternative to this cat-and-mouse loop: Waste time
well. If you do things that need doing—that you’re actually in the mood to do—
even procrastination can be productive. One of the things you’ll start to learn
over time is your rhythm for settling down to make stuff happen and the times
when you need to rearrange your bulletin board and eat lots of cookies.
Build Wasted Time Into Your Schedule

You probably know yourself pretty well by now. If you were the kid who had
your term paper finished two weeks early, you’re likely to be delivering ahead of
your deadlines today. And if you needed the adrenaline rush of the all-nighter to
crank out an entire thingamajig the night before it was due, chances are good
that you possess a very high-end coffee machine to help you keep up the good
work.
I happen to be a “waste time while fearing that I can’t do it” type. Always
have been. No matter how many thousands of times in my life I have proven this
fear incontrovertibly wrong, it persists with its own independent logic and food
supply. What I have learned to do is simply accept that this is going to be part of
my process, not take it so seriously, and simply build the freak-out into my
making-it-happen schedule.
When I signed my first book contract, I planned for a month of floundering,
and I executed this step in the schedule fabulously well. I spent that month
freaking out about not being smart enough, capable enough, worthy enough to
write a book, while gobbling up multiple episodes of Six Feet Under on DVD
every night. Suffice it to say that within about six weeks or so, I was stuffed
uncomfortably full of death and dysfunction, and felt ready to shift gears.
Do you put obstacles in your own way when it comes to writing? How might
you plan to accommodate your own resistance in a way that lets it think it is
winning while burning out its fuse?

TOP TEN TIME-WASTING STRATEGIES
When you’re not in a go-get-’em writing mode, the most important thing to do is
keep your creative engine warm and running. The following list of possibilities
is designed to help you keep your head in the game by doing things that
indirectly benefit your writing life and can quickly create a feeling of either
relaxation or reward.

1. WRITE A BLOG POST. Reinforce your expertise while doing a little fun,
informal writing.
2. VISIT YOUR ONLINE COMMUNITY. Take a five-minute coffee break
with other writers on Facebook and Twitter. Let their good news, struggles,
and insights percolate through you; chime in here and there. Notice any
seeds of new ideas or projects taking shape in your peripheral vision.
3. MAKE ORDER. Sort and purge your in-box. Vacuum or do dishes or fold
laundry. You can improve beauty and order around you while resetting
whatever brain pretzel you may be locked in.
4. STAND UP AND STRETCH. It’s far easier to keep butt-in-chair if blood
is flowing to it!
5. DO YOUR DUE DILIGENCE.Enter your business expense data into
QuickBooks or pay bills.
6. GET PREPARED. Update your to-do list.
7. EMPTY YOUR MIND. A three-minute meditation can settle your stirred
waters so you can see clearly again.
8. MANAGE YOUR CONTACTS. Add business cards and other contact
information you’ve collected recently into your contact database, sorting
and categorizing appropriately by type of audience.
9. SHARE THE WEALTH. Visit a few favorite blogs or websites, and tweet
about your findings.
10. CALL YOUR MOTHER. (But don’t open the mail while you talk; she
won’t like that.)

TAKE A TIME-OUT
I believe in signs. That’s why, when my ten-month-old son pulled the book
Sabbath: Restoring the Sacred Rhythm of Rest by Wayne Muller off the shelf for
the third time, I decided it was time to read it.
Lo and behold, on that fateful Saturday, I took a day off from my computer.
When my son Theo napped, I napped. Our family took a leisurely trip to the

pool. My husband and I cooked a meal together. I felt like a human being instead
of a human doing.
Muller credits Brother David Steindl-Rast for reminding us that the Chinese
pictograph for busy is composed of two characters: heart and killing. This
stopped me in my tracks. I, like almost everyone I know, am chronically,
overwhelmingly busy. Muller proposes that a day of rest gives us the
replenishment we need to live our lives well. To solve our problems creatively.
To nourish our hearts—and in our case, dear reader, our writing.
That day of Sabbath was such a success that my husband and I committed to
a family Sabbath every Saturday in which all work comes to a halt and the
family simply relaxes, enjoys each other, and follows the threads of curiosity and
delight wherever they might lead us.
The good news for all of us overachievers is that slowing down actually
produces more: work, joy, equilibrium, love. I wonder if rest may be all we need
to replenish our creative wells when they run dry.

HONOR YOUR TIME, SO THAT OTHERS CAN
Let’s do some expectation setting here: No one in your family or community of
friends is likely to have any idea what your writing life is all about. It’s not that
they won’t want to support you; it’s just that they won’t know how.
Years ago, when I was employed as a writer on a marketing team for a
company, the woman whose job it was to track and ship inventory reported me
to my boss. According to her, I was “just sitting at my desk, staring out the
window and doing nothing all day.” The reality was that I was producing
newsletters, articles, and brochures at an unprecedented rate and speed. People
who don’t write don’t necessarily understand that there is often reading,
thinking, and rumination involved in the writing process—and this may not look
like much to the casual observer.
People who don’t write may not be able to imagine that you really and truly
want to be in the closet with the door shut for three hours without talking to

anyone. When you leave for that desperately anticipated writing retreat, don’t
take it personally when everyone you know wants to “come on vacation” with
you.
The good news is that everyone who loves you can and will learn about your
writing life if you are willing to teach them—and hold the line for yourself. All
you need to worry about is being clear about the time you need and asking the
people close to you for support in respecting that time.
SAGE COHEN is the author of The Productive Writer: Tips & Tools to Help You Write More,
Stress Less & Create Success; Writing the Life Poetic: An Invitation to Read and Write Poetry;
and the poetry collection Like the Heart, the World.

Part 6
DESCRIPTION & WORD CHOICE:
What You Tell Readers

Chapter 29

BALANCING DESCRIPTION & SUMMARY
BY RON ROZELLE
Showing versus telling is a constantly waged war in creative writing. You might
expect the absolute rule to be: Show, Never Tell! Always and forever. No
exceptions.
The trouble is that for a writer there aren’t as many absolute rules as one
might think. There are certainly a few, like run-on sentences never being
acceptable, and subjects having to agree with verbs (though even that one can be
broken when writing dialect). But this matter of showing and telling refuses to
be governed so strictly.
First, let’s determine the distinction between the two. Then we’ll look at a
few ways you can sharpen your skills, when tackling description and setting, at
combining showing and telling.

UNDERSTAND THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN SHOWING
AND TELLING
Think about To Kill a Mockingbird. Never on any page in that novel does Scout,
the narrator, tell us that Atticus Finch, her father, is a good man. But throughout
the novel, we know it; at the end, one of the strongest images is his goodness.
The author, Harper Lee, carefully gives us scene after scene in which Atticus’
actions speak for themselves. She shows us his goodness constantly, and tells it
never.
Now consider this statement:
A good time was had by all.

Now, spend a moment with this paragraph from Toni Morrison’s novel Sula:
Old people were dancing with little children. Young boys with their sisters,
and the church women who frowned on any bodily expression of joy (except
when the hand of God commanded it) tapped their feet. Somebody (the
groom’s father, everybody said) had poured a whole pint jar of cane liquor
into the punch, so even the men who did not sneak out the back door to have
a shot, as well as the women who let nothing stronger than Black Draught
enter their blood, were tipsy. A small boy stood at the Victrola turning its
handle and smiling at the sound of Bert Williams’ ‘‘Save a Little Dram for
Me.’’
A question: Which of the two descriptions does more for you as a reader? I’ll bet
you chose the longer one, unless you’re one of those people who likes to be
different just for the heck of it—one of those go-against-the-grain sorts.
But the point is this: In terms of what we end up knowing about this
celebration, they both do the same thing. We end up, both times, realizing that a
good time was had by all.
So why should we opt for the longer one when the snippet fills the bill?
Because brevity doesn’t usually fill the bill for a writer or—much more to
the point—for a reader. The big difference between these two examples isn’t that
one is considerably longer. It’s that the most essential image, a sense of universal
enjoyment, is not specifically mentioned at all in the longer one. The first
version is telling; the second is showing. We know that all of the participants in
Morrison’s paragraph are enjoying themselves because we watch them doing it.
Showing rather than telling is part of the magic that you have to work as a
writer; in fact, it’s one of the most vital parts. Your reader has to make his way
through your story or novel—and then finally come away from it—with a sense
of the characters and the settings and the situations that must have seemed to
occur naturally. To use a sewing metaphor: You have to stitch your images
together so meticulously that the seams are invisible.

LET READERS
EXPERIENCES

SHARE

IN

YOUR

CHARACTERS’

One of the most effective ways to pull that off is to let your reader experience
things rather than be told about them, to feel them rather than have them reported
to him.
In Black Rain, Masuji Ibuse’s novel about the dropping of the atomic bomb
on Hiroshima, Japan, this sentence does not appear:
The city suffered significant damage in the blast.
But this paragraph does:
Among the ruins, the reflection of the sun on the pieces of broken glass on
the road was so strong that it was difficult to hold your head up as you
walked. The smell of death was a little fainter than the day before, but the
places where houses had collapsed into tile-covered heaps stank vilely and
were covered with great, black swarms of flies. The relief squads clearing the
ruins seemed to have been joined by reinforcements, since I saw some men
whose clothes, though bleached with frequent washing, were not soiled with
sweat and grime as yet.
Again, as in the previous example, we get the pertinent information in the first
version. But we see and hear and touch and taste and smell the experience in the
second. The difference between the two accounts is something like the difference
between an accident report that a patrolman would write and the sensation of
being in the accident itself. If you’ve ever been in one, you know that the curt,
factual summary is worlds away from the reality of experiencing it.
‘‘The city suffered significant damage in the blast’’ is too cold, too distant
and too all-inclusive. So what Ibuse does is drive home the image in small
details, one after the other, throughout the novel. Pay attention to the delicate
pictures here, almost like miniatures arranged on a wall: the reflection of the sun

on the pieces of broken glass, the collapsed houses, the smell of death. The
swarms of flies. All bits and pieces of wordsmithing that add up to an inevitable
conclusion: The city suffered significantly in the blast.
In short, the second piece is considerably better. And it’s better because it
brings the reader more fully in.
Now, this is important—so heads up, please. The longer version is not better
because it is all showing and no telling. It’s better because it is both showing and
telling. Your fiction has to be a balanced blend of both approaches.

USE DESCRIPTIVE DETAILS TO SHOW YOUR STORY
In her novel The Book of Mercy, Kathleen Cambor could have written this:
In addition to the potential risk and the possibility of notoriety, one reason he
chose to become a fireman was that he liked the uniform, which his mother
also admired. But his father was against the whole idea.
It would have gotten the point across. But not nearly so effectively as what she
did write:
He liked everything about the idea of being a fireman. The excitement, the
danger, the chance to be a hero or a prince. The dress-blue uniform, dark
serge, a knifelike crease down the center of each pants leg, patent-leather
visor on the cap, in which a man could see himself reflected. ‘‘Very fancy,’’
said his mother. His father’s eyes were wells of rage and disappointment. He
spit onto the floor.
The short one tells us pretty much what we need to know to understand this part
of the story. But the longer one—the real one that Cambor actually did compose
—does far more than that. It takes us into the attitude of the character, into his
sense of values. Rather than telling us, it shows us how he feels about becoming
a fireman. And there is more drama and description in those last two sentences,

about his father’s reaction to it, than the author could have conveyed in a page or
more of explanation.
Look a little farther along at a bit more about how the character feels about
his new job:
He learned to smell the smoke from blocks away, he watched for the sky to
begin to lighten, as if from the tip of a rising sun. Each time, he felt his heart
pound, his own heart filled his chest, it echoed in his ears until they made the
final turn into the red-hot stunning light.
Here again the writer could have told us what we needed to know in fewer
words. ‘‘His job was exciting’’ might suffice. Or, if you want a little more detail:
‘‘His heart rate elevated when his truck approached a fire.’’ But the point is that
your reader wants, in fact demands, a lot more detail, not just a little.
Your characters, their situations, the basic logistics of your plot—how
characters move from Point A to Point B and the chronological order of their
actions—are all important to your story, essential, in fact. What brings the story
to life and makes it all as real as seeing it happen for the reader, is your
description. Showing these things, as opposed to simply reporting them, will be
what finally makes the whole thing work.
Dig back into that last example. Note the strong images of the lightening sky
and the pounding of the fireman’s heart. That’s fine stuff that drives home to the
reader exactly how this fellow is feeling at that moment, in that place. Because
the reader has probably felt that way, too.
In your story, you need to plug your reader into images like that—to
situations and emotions he can relate to. That’s difficult, maybe impossible, to do
when you are telling the thing. But your images can ring soundly and true when
you are showing.
RON ROZELLE is the author of five books, including Write Great Fiction: Description & Setting.

Practice Describing Common Actions
Make a list of several common action verbs that are generic in their meanings—words like
walk, talk and hit. Then take a few moments and write down as many verbs or phrases you
can think of that are more specific. Your goal is not to create a catalog of more precise
descriptions; instead, practice refining an action down to its clearest description.
Use a thesaurus. Many of its offerings will be what you’re looking for. Some won’t. And
others will help you come up with some of your own.

Chapter 30

FOLLOW THE RULES FOR STRONGER WRITING
BY NANCY LAMB
Strong prose is a matter of practice and discipline and conscious awareness of
the words you put on the page. There are rules for effective writing, and you can
save yourself a lot of unnecessary grief if you take the time to incorporate them
into your writing psyche.
These rules can’t make a good writer a brilliant one. But they can make an
average writer a good writer, and a good writer better. They can turn a mediocre
story into a memorable one. And they’re a great guide for revising your work.

1. NEVER LET THE TRUTH GET IN THE WAY OF YOUR
STORY
Creative writing is just that: creative. If the truth prevents you from telling your
fictional story effectively, get rid of the facts and invent something that makes
the story work.

2. NEVER USE TWO WORDS WHEN ONE WILL DO
Less is more. Usually one powerful word will do the same job as two weaker
ones. Instead of:
Andrea stared at the horrible, slithering mass of snakes.
Write:
Andrea stared at the writhing mass of snakes.

3. USE THE ACTIVE VOICE

The difference between adequate prose and good prose is the difference between
passive and active voice. Make certain that active verbs drive your prose. Instead
of:
There were many dead bodies on the ground.
Write:
Dead bodies littered the ground.

4. USE PARALLEL CONSTRUCTION
Parallel construction allows you to write in the most interesting, economical
fashion by aligning your verb tenses and uniting phrases with a common
construction. Instead of:
The vampire bared his teeth and then, raising his claws to sharpen them, he
started licking his chops. “Gotcha!” he said with a grin.
Write:
The vampire bared his teeth, sharpened his claws, and licked his chops.
“Gotcha!” he said with a grin.

5. KEEP RELATED WORDS TOGETHER
Linguistic studies have shown that most of us have a natural instinct for the
placement of adjectives. We don’t say, “I have a blue shiny car.” Instead we say,
“I have a shiny blue car.” The same principle should be applied to sentences you
write. Instead of:
Frankenstein noticed a large bloodstain in the rug that was in the middle.
Write:
Frankenstein noticed a large bloodstain in the middle of the rug.

6. REPLACE ADJECTIVES AND ADVERBS WITH VIVID
NOUNS AND ACTIVE VERBS
Cultivate the use of strong verbs and concrete nouns. They are the most powerful
tools in a writer’s arsenal. Instead of:
Since the day Barbara met the werewolf, she felt very scared and frightened.
Write:
Since the day she met the werewolf, terror haunted Barbara’s heart.
There is no surer way to weaken your prose than to pepper it with adverbs. There
are, of course, times when the adverb is appropriate and necessary. Choose those
times carefully.
She looked longingly and lovingly at the chocolate.
Or:
She looked at the chocolate with longing and love.
Or better:
Her eyes consumed the chocolate.

7. DON’T OVEREXPLAIN
Give your reader the benefit of the doubt and allow him to intuit the meaning of
the dialogue, rather than read about it. Instead of:
“I’m sorry,” Peter said consolingly.
Write:
“I’m sorry,” Peter said.

8. WRITE CINEMATICALLY

When you write, think visually. Language holds endless possibilities for a
creative approach to expressing an idea.
Eddy Peters exemplified this when he wrote, “Not only does the English
Language borrow words from other languages, it sometimes chases them down
dark alleys, hits them over the head and goes through their pockets.”

9. VARY YOUR SENTENCE STRUCTURE
Using nothing but noun-verb declarative sentences makes for dull reading. Break
up the monotony. Instead of:
John walked to the closet. He opened the door. He took one look inside and
he screamed.
Write:
John walked to the closet and opened the door. Taking one look inside, he
screamed.

10. CREATE INTEREST BY MIXING IDEAS
Mixing alien ideas and drawing unlikely parallels will make the writing fresh.
She was the kind of girl who collected men like she collected speeding
tickets. They both happened when she wasn’t paying attention.

11. LISTEN TO THE MUSIC OF THE WORDS
The best prose has a rhythm to it. Honor that rhythm. There have been days
when I’ve spent half an hour searching the thesaurus for a word that has three
syllables instead of two. Sometimes the difference is subtle, but it can make the
reading experience more satisfying. Instead of:
Some writers catch on to the rhythm and they delight in the sound of the
music as soon as they learn to write.

Write:
Some writers feel the rhythm and hear the music from the moment they learn
to write.

12. AVOID WORD REPETITION
There’s nothing more tiresome for a reader than seeing the same tiresome words
over and over in the same paragraph. This creates the overall impression that the
reader is reading the same repetitive, tiresome prose over again and it tires out
the reader. Note: The exception to this rule—the critical exception—is when you
repeat a word for emphasis.

13. BEWARE OF IT
Grammarians call it an “obscure pronominal reference.” That’s when it is left
dangling in a sentence without a clear reference to whom or what it refers.
Double-check for dangling its. Where you find:
Kathy couldn’t believe it was happening.
Clarify:
Kathy couldn’t believe her sister was finally accepting the blame.
NANCY LAMB is the author of fiction and nonfiction books for adults and children, including The
Art and Craft of Storytelling and The Writer’s Guide to Crafting Stories for Children.

Chapter 31

KEEP YOUR STORY LEAN
BY NANCY KRESS
Besides a careful blend of elements in your writing, successful fiction also
requires a strategic approach to what you leave out of the story. Needless
reiteration and superfluous detail can bog down your tale—but prose that’s lean
and mean in a “less is more” approach draws readers in with its effectiveness.
Specifically, a story can often be much improved by avoiding our things:
expository openings, descriptive repetition, explanatory dialogue and Aesopian
moralizing.

NIX THE EXPOSITION
Especially if you write commercial fiction, you’ll find that readers like to be
propelled right into the middle of some interesting event, and they want to see
that event as it unfolds. This means starting your story with a dramatized scene.
There should be characters onstage immediately, talking and interacting. Leave
out explanations of how they got there—you can explain it later, if necessary.
Which of these two openings is more satisfying?
Five years ago, John Meadows married Linda Carrington. Although both had
grown up in Brooklyn and didn’t want to leave, John had accepted a job in
Montana and moved his young family west. He found he liked the mountains
and open sky, but Linda was frustrated and unhappy. This all became clear
the night they attended a party at their neighbors’ house. “I told you I didn’t
want to go to this,” Linda said as she stood beside John on their neighbors’

steps. “It’s just going to be as lame as every other party we’ve been to since
we got here.”
“You used to love parties,” John said, avoiding eye contact.
“Yeah, well, that was back in Brooklyn. But Montana isn’t Brooklyn.”
“No.” He looked at the mountains colored flame by the setting sun, the
sky he had come to love. Then he looked at Linda, glowering even before
they went inside. In five years of marriage, she had changed so much. They
both had.
He pressed the doorbell.
In the second passage, the exposition has been left out— but not neglected.
Instead each expository point is shown through thoughts, dialogue, and actions.

LET THE IMAGE SPEAK FOR ITSELF
Descriptive repetition occurs when an author tells us what’s already been shown.
For example, consider the following paragraph:
Walking her dog through the park, Tessa abruptly stopped in the middle of
the rose path. She turned slowly, sniffing in all directions, nose wrinkling in
disgust. Something here smelled very bad. At the same moment, Duke
started barking frantically and straining at his leash. Tessa could barely hold
him as he nosed under a rose bush.
He’d smelled the odor, too. What, Tessa wondered, could it be? She
peered under the bush.
Can you spot the three superfluous sentences? They are:
The third sentence: We already know that Tessa smells something bad, so
we don’t need to be told.
The sixth sentence: It’s already very clear that Duke, too, has smelled the
odor.

The seventh sentence: Tessa’s curiosity is made obvious by her sniffing and
peering.
Repetition dilutes your effect. As readers, we want to experience the story along
with the character, not have it narrated for us from the outside. Reiteration also
increases word count and slows pace, while uncluttered prose delivers more
punch, faster.
Ironically most writers tell after they show not because they mistrust the
reader’s intelligence to “get” the point, but rather because they lack faith in their
own prose. The unnecessary recurrence of telling after showing will drive away
sophisticated readers. If, on the other hand, your writing hasn’t made events and
motive clear enough, then you can strengthen it through additional action.

CUT EXPLANATORY DIALOGUE
Purge your fiction of lengthy dialogue explanations that wear down readers. This
often involves one character clarifying the meaning of events for another
character, as in this example:
Martin lit a cigarette. “Do you really want to know why I didn’t double-cross
John?”
“Yes,” Kara said.
“I could have, at several points. First, you remember, there was that time
he practically goaded me into telling the others about what he did.”
“I remember.”
“Then, after he pulled those other stunts …”
Martin will go on to explain his reasoning and code of ethics, but we’ll be asleep
by then. If the story has done its job of dramatization, we already know all the
times Martin behaved well, plus the reason he did so. Let the story dramatize the
meaning of its events, instead of the characters expounding on them.

AVOID “AESOP ENDINGS”

Closely related to explanatory dialogue, but even worse, is narrative moralizing
at the end of a story. This is when the author—not the character—tells us “what
it all means.” This worked very well for Aesop in ancient Greece, but his
purpose was to illustrate life lessons, not to create a dramatic story with
believable characters doing interesting things.
This is not, of course, to say that modern fiction doesn’t illustrate lessons.
It’s possible to interpret Lady Brett’s actions in The Sun Also Rises as “It’s better
to give than receive,” and Moby-Dick’s Captain Ahab is a clear symbol of “Pride
goeth before a fall.” But these are characters, not merely symbols, with fully
developed pasts, problems, angers, loves, and regrets. More important, the
morals that their stories demonstrate are implied by the story’s action, not stated
outright by their authors. Create strong characters in dramatic situations, and the
outcome of those situations will guide our interpretations.
Each of these avoidable story aspects follows the same principle: Leave out
whatever you can that’s not pertinent in a particular scene. If you don’t naturally
write like this, print out your first draft and edit ruthlessly. By leaving out all you
can, your story will gain immeasurably.
NANCY KRESS is the author of twenty-eight books, including Write Great Fiction: Characters,
Emotion & Viewpoint. Her work has garnered her four Nebula Awards and two Hugo Awards.

Chapter 32

MAKE YOUR TONE PITCH-PERFECT
BY ADAIR LARA
Do you obsess about the tone of your writing as you revise? You should. Tone is
one of the most overlooked elements of writing. It can create interest or kill it.
It’s no wonder that so many of the countless conversations I’ve had with
writing students and colleagues have been about problems related to tone. A
friend submitting a novel says the editors “don’t like the main character.” A
nonfiction book on balancing a family and a career skirts the edge of whining.
An agent turns down a query because she feels “too much distance from the
heart of the story.” I scan the latest work of a journalist friend who’s coming to
dinner and find it meticulously sourced and well written, but grim in outlook.
And of course any publication you want to write for will have its own tone,
which it would be smart for you to try to match. Notice how quietly all New
Yorker profile pieces begin, while Utne Reader favors unconventional and
unexpected viewpoints that challenge the status quo.
What exactly do I mean by tone? That’s a good question, as there are many
terms—mood, style, voice, cadence, inflection—used to mean much the same
thing. For now let’s agree that tone is the author’s attitude toward his subject:
grave, amused, scientific, intimate, aggrieved, authoritative, whatever.
If you were a photographer, tone would be the way you light your subject.
For dramatic shadows, the subject would be lit from the side. For a scary effect,
from above. For romance, lit with candles. In a movie, tone is often conveyed
with music—think of the ominous score accompanying the girl swimming in
shark-infested waters in Jaws.

A writer doesn’t have a soundtrack or a strobe light to build the effect she
wants. She has conflict, surprise, imagery, details, the words she chooses, and
the way she arranges them in sentences. Like the tone you use when you talk to
somebody, tone in writing determines how a reader responds. If the piece sounds
angry, he gets nervous. If it’s wry and knowing, he settles in for an enjoyable
read. If it’s dull, he leaves it on the train, half read.
Thus the wrong tone can derail an otherwise good piece. I’m surprised how
seldom writing students note this during our workshop discussions, as if it’s
impolite to admit that they’re made uncomfortable by how much the narrator
seems to hate her mother or to say that their thoughts drifted elsewhere by the
second page of the overly abstract piece about mindfulness in the workplace.
You can detect tone problems in your own work simply by noting where
your attention wanders as you reread it. Or, better, by reading it aloud. When
you’re ready to revise a piece, read it to someone else or ask someone to read it
to you. You won’t have to search for awkward or boring or whiny parts—you’ll
hear them.
Some problems with tone are small and can be easily fixed during revision.
Others might require a new approach to the piece as a whole. Let’s look at a few
of the easiest and most effective ways to improve the tone of your writing.

1. AVOID A PREDICTABLE TREATMENT OF YOUR
SUBJECT
In the first draft you write what people expect you to write—what you expect
yourself to write. “I wanted a car.” The tone becomes predictable. Now, during
your revision, go deeper. Seek out the harder truths. It’s in the second, third,
fourth draft that you say something we don’t expect you to say, something even
you didn’t expect you to say. When you get tired of being nice. “I wanted a car
so I could drive out of my marriage.” Surprise yourself, and you will surprise
your reader.

Similarly you’ll want to avoid taking an overly emotional approach to an
overly emotional subject. Think of the dry, reserved tone in which Joan Didion
recalls the anguish of losing her husband in The Year of Magical Thinking. What
if she had wailed about her loss? There would be nothing for us readers to do,
even if the emotions being reported to us were very sad. (Note: If you’re having
a hard time distancing yourself from the raw emotion of a personal subject, this
may be a sign that you need to let time do its magic work. Frank McCourt said it
took him years before he could detach from his anger toward his feckless father
enough to give Angela’s Ashes its nonjudgmental tone. When something bad
happens, of course we feel upset, even as if life has treated us unfairly—but
that’s not a great place to write from. Let the experience ripen in your memory
until you’ve achieved the distance you need.)
If your subject is inherently serious, try taking a lighter approach. What’s
Your Poo Telling You? came to Chronicle Books as a serious examination of—
well, you know. In that form, it might have sold a few thousand copies. The
lighter treatment led to sales of hundreds of thousands of copies. There’s no
denying that titles with tone sell books: Consider My Miserable, Lonely Lesbian
Pregnancy or Skinny Bitch.

2. KEEP TONE CONSISTENT FROM START TO FINISH
Make sure your very first sentence establishes the tone you want. Look at the
opening line of “The Lesson” by Toni Cade Bambara:
Back in the days when everyone was old and stupid or young and foolish and
me and Sugar were the only ones just right, this lady moved on our block
with nappy hair and proper speech and no makeup.
In one sentence, you know who everybody is. Not only do you want to read on,
but you want to know what else she’s written so you can get that, too.
You will choose different tones for different subjects, of course, just as you
would dress differently for a date than for an interview. But stay away from

changing tones within a piece. One minute you’re riffing comically on Uncle
Frank’s parade of girlfriends, and the next, the reader is caught chortling when
you shift to Uncle Frank’s abuse of his daughter. Or the thriller shifts from a
slumped body in an alley to the detective’s girlfriend shopping for bridal gowns,
and suddenly we’re in a romance. (Notice, by the way, how many genres
actually have tone in their names: thriller, romance, mystery, horror.)
Read your work looking for places where the tone fades or shifts. Focus your
revision there.

3. CUT RUTHLESSLY
If you reread a piece and decide that nothing works until the second page, why
not simply start it there?
The delete key is your friend. The novelist Carolyn Chute told Writers Ask:
“I write a lot of junk. On and on and on, all this junk. But every now and then
this dramatic moment happens, so I lift that out and put that aside. And then I
write all this junk: They’re brushing their teeth, they’re sitting there, they’re
looking around—you know. Then something will happen and I’ll pull that out.
Because those are the only strong things.”
Read your work looking for places where your engagement wanes. Boring is
bad. Careful is right next to it. When it comes to tone, don’t try to fix the boring
parts—toss them. You can’t fix boring. Other places where the delete key comes
in handy:
Off-topic tangents. You start out writing about the president’s pooch and by
the homestretch you’re discoursing disdainfully on the state of our economy
and what a boob the president is—as if people are lining up to hear your
thoughts on that. Stick to the subject at hand.
Overemphasis on themes. Don’t hit readers over the head with your own
interpretation of the meaning of it all. You provide the right detail—say, the

wooden coffin—and they’ll supply the mortality of man. Resist the urge to
overtly explain—it’s condescending and redundant.

4. LET TENSION SUSTAIN TONE
Your piece, whatever it is, should be rife with conflict. It’s not enough to write
an essay about how much you like to spend the day in bed. If nothing is stopping
you from lazing around under the sheets, then you have no problem, and thus the
piece has no tension—an essential element in sustaining any tone for the long
haul. If you find you’ve committed this mistake, whether in a fictional story or a
true one, bring in someone with the opposite point of view (mothers are always
good for this!). That’s why columnists so often reference their mates—to be the
foil, the reasonable one, so the author isn’t ranting in a vacuum.

5. USE YOUR VOICE
Are you one of the many writers who blog? Unless you know tomorrow’s stock
prices or are telling readers how to relight a furnace on a freezing day, it will be
your voice, not the content, that draws them in. So you must sound like
somebody. This is true with other forms of personal writing, as well. Resist the
urge to come off as uncomplicated, reasonable, or polite. If you’re expressing
opinions, express them! (Note that this is a format where opinion is the point, not
a tiresome add-on.) Don’t say that whether or not someone likes a particular film
“seems to me a matter of sensibility and perspective.” We know that! Be in a
mood. Take a position. “Anyone who doesn’t like The Ruling Class should be
cast into hell for all eternity.” Look for opportunities to bring a human voice into
your work. There’s more sense of someone behind the words “I had a breast cut
off” (Molly Ivins) than “I had a mastectomy.”
Three Tips for Consistent Tone
1. Find a paragraph that sounds exactly the way you want to sound and tape it to
your computer so that it’s always in front of you.

2. Each time you’re about to return to the piece, spend twenty minutes reading the
work of an author who writes in the tone you’re after. We’re natural mimics. You
might try taking this a step further by more closely examining the sentence rhythms
and word choices and looking for ways to make them your own. John Lukacs once
said, “Style begins the way fashion begins: Somebody admires how the other man
dresses and adapts it for himself.”
3. Starts and finishes are especially important to tone. When revising your work, try
moving some of your best sentences, the ones with the right energy and tone, up
to the top of your document. Could the piece begin this way? Experiment with
moving equally strong sentences to the conclusion of your piece, for a cohesive
ending.

6.
CONVEY
DESCRIPTIONS

TONE

THROUGH

DETAILS

AND

Consider the difference between “in October” and “under an October sky.” A
description of scenery, however luscious, can tire the reader if that’s all it is. Use
the imagery to show us your character’s mood: A sad character will notice
rotting houses and untended yards; a contented one will see picturesque shacks
and gardens in a profuse state of nature.
When adding details to enrich your writing, tone comes from being as
specific as possible. Change “My husband committed suicide” to “My husband
gassed himself in our Passat in the Austrian Alps.”
I once taught a travel-writing class aboard a cruise up the Amazon and sent
passengers ashore to a remote village with notebooks. One student, surprised and
amused by the satellite dishes towering over the small huts, dubbed them “the
flowers of the Amazon” in her resulting piece. Another, having overheard the
song “The Air That I Breathe” on an antiquated village speaker, wrote, “The fact
is you can hear the whole planet breathing while you’re here. As one Brazilian
told me, it’s the lung of the world.” Tone in travel writing comes from such acute
observations.
In memoir or fiction, it comes also from offbeat character details, like this
one from the memoir The Glass Castle by Jeannette Walls:

Dad was so sure a posse of federal investigators was on our trail that he
smoked his unfiltered cigarettes from the wrong end. That way, he explained,
he burned up the brand name, and if the people who were tracking us looked
in his ashtray, they’d find unidentifiable butts instead of Pall Malls that could
be traced to him.
The narrator here, it is safe to say, is not admiring the cunning of her father; the
tone suggests she is old enough to worry about the folly of her parents.

7. LEARN TO RECOGNIZE BUILT-IN PROBLEMS WITH
TONE.
Everybody who’s ever been fired has sat down to write a book about it. But
harping on the wrong that’s been done to you can make your readers uneasy. If
they were seated next to you on a plane, they’d be desperately longing to change
seats. Lawsuits, controversial issues, other people’s behavior, how overwhelmed
you were by the flood of wedding gifts and what a chore it was to write all those
thank-you notes: all such topics force you to work hard to overcome the reader’s
unease at smelling an agenda, or anger, or bragging.
In these instances, to fix the tone, you have to fix the way you think about a
given subject. You have to back off, calm down, see other points of view, maybe
even take some responsibility for whatever happened. When writing about such
delicate subjects, you must not let a negative tone take over by ascribing motives
to people: You just tell what they did, and let the reader read motive into it. You
must write with forgiveness, understanding, and humor. In some ways, this can
be a payoff to examining your tone as you write: You change the writing, and the
writing changes you. But if you find this is not possible with your subject, don’t
be afraid to scrap a project that you discover has inherent problems with tone.
You’ll be a better writer for it.
ADAIR LARA is the author of numerous columns and books, including Naked, Drunk, and
Writing.

Chapter 33

UNDERSTANDING GENDER DIFFERENCES
BY LEIGH ANNE JASHEWAY
Men and women are different. There, I said it.
Now let me go even further out on a limb. Chances are, if you’re female, you
write like a girl, and if you’re male, you write like a guy. Not that there’s
anything wrong with that … unless, that is, you’d like your writing to be read by
members of another gender, or you’re trying to create characters of the opposite
sex. If so, it might just help to have a better understanding about how the other
half thinks, acts, reads, and writes.
Linguists, sociologists, behavior specialists and functional brain researchers
have documented gender’s effect on almost everything, so it’s natural that it
plays a role in how we write and what we’re attracted to as readers.
The ability to use language that has appeal outside your own gender can
boost your success as an author; take the U.K. bestseller Holly’s Inbox, which
has often been compared to Helen Fielding’s runaway hit Bridget Jones’s Diary.
The name on the cover of the book? Holly Denham. Its real author? Bill Surie,
who wrote for his female audience so convincingly that readers had no problem
believing the story had been written by a woman.
And then there’s J.K. Rowling, who is so good at transcending gender (and
age) that her books are devoured by girls and boys (and women and men) by the
millions.
If you haven’t considered the impact of your own gender on your writing, it’s
time to start. By educating yourself about how men and women differ, you’ll be
able to better understand your audience, broaden your writing’s appeal, and

make educated choices when it comes to language, story, and style—no matter
what you’re writing or who you’re writing it for.

TALK THE TALK
If you’re writing a romance novel, you know your audience is primarily female;
if you’re working on an exposé about steroid use in baseball, you can assume
you’ll have mostly male readers.
But when most of us sit down to write, we’re really just thinking that what
we have to say will grab any reader who finds our topic interesting. We don’t
usually pay enough attention to how something as simple as choosing our words
can attract or turn off prospective readers.
At a recent writing workshop, I critiqued a manuscript on mind mapping.
The topic usually fascinates me—but this piece used decidedly masculine
language, from the chapter titles to the metaphors, complete with references to
NASCAR, rocket launchers, and drill sergeants. Because I didn’t relate to these
examples, I wasn’t drawn into the manuscript. In fact, I felt almost excluded.
Gender-specific terms aren’t always immediately obvious; there are plenty of
seemingly ordinary words and phrases that are much more likely to be uttered by
one sex or the other. A woman is three times more likely to use the word
gorgeous, for example. And when men do use it, it’s typically only to describe a
woman—not a baby, a pair of shoes, or a piece of chocolate cake.
So let’s start with some basic guidelines. No matter what you’re writing, if
your intended audience is female, make sure to include plenty of personal
pronouns—I, you, and we—and descriptive terms. If your intended audience is
male, on the other hand, trade in pronouns for articles—such as a, the, and that
—choose active verbs, limit adjectives, and include concrete figures, like
numbers. Observe the stylistic differences between these two statements: “I’m
sorry we’re late; we had a flat tire on our way here,” and, “The tire blew when
we hit seventy on the freeway.” Chances are you can tell right away which sex is
talking in each one.

When you want to appeal to a mixed audience, review your writing with an
eye for instances in which the language skews toward your own gender. When
you find them, make revisions to include a balance of wording that caters to the
other sex as well. Pay special attention to your analogies; if you’re writing an
article on choosing energy-efficient appliances, for example, and you compare a
refrigerator to a sports car, counter later in the piece by mentioning that the
dishwasher purrs like a kitten. Or opt for gender-neutral analogies, such as this
one from Wendy and Larry Maltz’s The Porn Trap: The Essential Guide to
Overcoming Problems Caused by Pornography: “Don’t think of [the six steps]
like stepping stones across a creek, but rather sections of a bridge …”

WALK THE WALK
No matter what you write, one of the earliest decisions you’ll make is how to
approach your topic. Gender should definitely play a role here. Whether they’re
watching a movie, reading a novel, or consulting a self-help article, men
generally prefer to see something accomplished—a battle won, a dog trained, a
disease conquered. Women often favor a focus on the relationships and emotions
behind the story—what happens to the family left at home while the spouse is
off fighting the war, what it’s like for the dog to learn to sit and stay, how to
handle the strain of caring for an ailing family member. This helps explain why
recent surveys show that women read approximately 80 percent of all literary
fiction and most self-help books, while men are more likely to read history,
science fiction, and political tomes.
At a writing workshop I recently taught, I asked my students to write a
paragraph about what it would be like to be an astronaut during liftoff. Once they
were finished, I asked them to write another paragraph from the perspective of
someone from the opposite gender. Both the males and the females writing from
a male perspective emphasized the thrill of the ride (“I felt like I was straddling a
200-ton bucking bronco headed into the cosmos!”) and the sense of
accomplishment of being chosen for the mission. The women and men writing

from the female perspective focused on being separated from family and friends
(“Will the kids remember to feed that cat?”) and having doubts about the whole
decision to go into space.
Here’s an example from an exercise in a college English class in which
students were paired up and asked to craft a story together by taking turns
writing alternating paragraphs. With one particular team, the gender differences
became glaringly (and amusingly) obvious:
At first, Laurie couldn’t decide which kind of tea she wanted. The
chamomile, which used to be her favorite for lazy evenings at home, now
reminded her too much of Carl …
Meanwhile, Advance Sgt. Carl Harris, leader of the attack squadron now
in orbit over Skylon 4, had more important things to think about than the
neuroses of an airheaded bimbo named Laurie with whom he had spent one
sweaty night over a year ago …
He bumped his head and died almost immediately, but not before he felt
one last pang of regret for psychologically brutalizing the one woman who
had ever had feelings for him …
Little did she know, but she had less than 10 seconds to live …
The female writer focused on the emotional issues she felt were vital to her
heroine—even when to do so, she had to kill off Advance Sergeant Harris. The
male writer, on the other hand, did everything he could to move the action along
and cut out “extraneous” details.
The lessons are clear if you’re writing for a single gender, but what’s a writer
to do to be more inclusive of both men and women? Where there is yin, balance
it with yang. Janet Evanovich does this exceptionally well. Her most popular
novels feature Stephanie Plum, a bail bondswoman who works in a maledominated industry but does her job with a characteristically feminine style
(relying on friends, trying to be a good daughter, taking care of her hamster,
mulling over her intimate relationships, etc.). Employ Evanovich’s method: If

you choose a female approach to a topic, bring balance by incorporating more
masculine elements, and vice versa.

DRESS THE PART
Sociologists suggest that the female focus on nurturing relationships and the
male compulsion to get the job done not only affect what we’re interested in, but
the way we use language—and, naturally, the style that appeals to us on a page.
Take these recent reviews of two movies meant to speak to very different
audiences. For Motherhood: “If you are a mother, if you know a mother, if you
have a mother, this is the movie for you”; “The best comedy about being a
mother in modern America today. And a must-see for every father, too”; and,
“Sweet, charming and frantically funny.” Notice how the language conjures up
images of not just motherhood, but also friendship (“if you know a mother”),
daughterhood (“if you have a mother”) and fatherhood. The adjectives let us
know the movie will focus on someone women can relate to: an overworked
mother trying to keep her sanity in today’s fast-paced world. Contrast this with
reviews for Law Abiding Citizen: “A taut thriller”; “A breathtaking thrill ride”;
and, “This is one fight to the finish you won’t want to miss.” The language here
is sparse, action-packed, and absent of real detail. What is the movie about?
We’re not sure, but we know there will be car crashes and things blowing up.
Style differences are especially important to understand if you’re writing
dialogue. One of the most difficult undertakings we face as writers is putting the
right words into our characters’ mouths. Recognizing differences in the way the
genders communicate can help you create more believable, engaging characters
that will ring true for your readers. Linguistic research has found that women are
more likely to state preferences rather than demands (“I would like a glass of
wine”), start a sentence with a question (“What do you think about … ?”), and
use apologetic language even when being decisive (“I’m so sorry, but I’m going
to have to lay you off”). Men, on the other hand, use more commanding and
aggressive language (“Grab me a beer”) and are more likely to pepper everyday

conversation with less accommodating phrasing (which can include things like
sarcasm, put-downs, or references to taboo body parts). Studies have also shown
that men don’t divulge much personal information in everyday conversation,
while women frequently do.
To help illustrate these differences, let’s look at two real-life writing samples,
both on the topic of exercise. The first is from Amy Gallo’s “Whittle While You
Work,” which appears in Self online: “This is our kind of on-the-job training!
Daniel Loigerot, a Pilates instructor in New York City, designed these moves to
help you tone all over in about 10 minutes using a resistance band and chair.”
The second is from “Gut Check,” an unattributed piece on the Men’s Fitness
website: “If you fail both tests, you need more core work. Simply perform the
tests as exercises, three to four times a week—doing one to two sets for 50
percent of your max time for each—before you do any other lifts. Hartman also
advises that you not use more than 20 percent of your body weight on any lift
until you achieve a passing score. That may seem drastic, but your core will get
up to speed quickly, and you’ll immediately be able to lift heavier.”
First, compare the style of the titles: “Whittle While You Work” to “Gut
Check.” As you might guess, in the first piece, the style is soft and sounds
helpful. In the Men’s Fitness article, can you feel the author goading the reader
to be competitive? The reader may have already failed some tests; he needs to
“achieve a passing score” so he can achieve his goal to “lift heavier.”
If you’re writing for a single gender—whether you’re penning an
instructional piece or working on your novel-in-progress—don’t shy away from
integrating these style differences into your work. They may seem subtle, but
you’ll be surprised at how much careful attention to these preferences can boost
your writing’s appeal to your audience.
Of course, we’re not all the same in our differences—I’d be willing to bet
you’re thinking of plenty of exceptions to the above points right now. It’s true
that not all women think and behave alike, and neither do all men. But just as
young adult writers research the specific needs and behaviors of teens and

tweens, and romance and sci-fi novelists work to understand what makes their
audiences different from the rest of the reading world, all of us should consider
gender issues before tapping out those first few words on our keyboards. When
you do, remember these words, from Edward Abbey: “It is the difference
between men and women, not the sameness, that creates the tension and the
delight.”
LEIGH ANNE JASHEWAY is the author of fifteen books and the winner the Erma Bombeck
Award for Humor Writing.

Focus on the Writing Life:
RESEARCHING YOUR WORK

RESEARCHING YOUR IDEAS
BY THE EDITORS OF WRITER’S DIGEST
The lengths that writers can go to understand their subjects may be best
exemplified by James Alexander Thom, a former journalist who has written a
number of acclaimed and best-selling books about the American frontier
experience. When Thom decided to write the story of Mary Ingles for his book
Follow the River, he actually retraced parts of the route Ingles followed when
she escaped Indian captivity in 1755.
Following the completion of the book, Thom said he could only write
Ingles’s story after he had walked in her steps. Thom couldn’t trace Ingles’s
entire six-week trek through the woods along the Ohio and Kenawha rivers, but
he made five separate trips to key spots along her route. At times Thom even ate
what Ingles had eaten, and at one point he fasted for a week.
For the rest of his research, Thom visited Ingles’s descendants, read detailed
family accounts of her life, and studied historic documents. In the long run
Thom’s research only made his job easier, and it made his account more
believable.
This kind of dogged pursuit of authenticity can make your work stand out,
whether you are writing a historical novel or an article on historic cars. To
convince readers—and editors—that you know what you are talking about, you
must first spend the time to understand the subject yourself.

As you outline your book or article, the idea of research may sound like
drudgery, a necessary evil you must go through before you can get to your real
work—the writing. Yet what many of us would consider drudgery is actually the
most important step in the writing process. Consider, for a moment, that good
research is what makes your finished work come alive with realism and truth.
Each interview, Google session, or trip to the library adds excitement and
authenticity to your finished piece. Research enlightens you and enables you to
enlighten your audience. Research is nothing less than the heart and soul of what
we do.
In reality, there are only so many subjects you can write from personal
experience. And there are only so many subjects that you can learn firsthand, as
Thom did. Fortunately, to learn everything else you can rely on others’ expertise
through interviews. The Internet has made millions of information sources
instantly available to anyone who can afford a high-speed connection.
Whether your research is based on personal experience, interviews,
document searches, the Internet, or any combination of the above, approach it
with the same dogged professionalism. In the end, the quality of what you write
will be based on the quality of what you know and learn. This is true whether
you are writing fiction, nonfiction, or magazine articles. In all these cases,
research adds the critical element of realism. This chapter provides you with the
tools needed to approach research in a time-efficient and thorough manner.
The quality of what you learn is determined not just by the quality of your
source material, but also by the mind-set you bring to the project. Approach your
research with a real desire to learn. Find enough sources to obtain as many
points of view as possible. Don’t just accept the things you read or hear; ask
questions and make your judgments based on factual information. At the same
time, challenge your own assumptions. Be willing to consider other ideas and
opinions even if it means reevaluating your work or redoing what you have done
so far (which is admittedly painful).

FINDING THE RIGHT INFORMATION
The task of research is somewhat like that of writing. More important than where
to start is the need to start. You can’t know exactly what an article or book will
be until you write it. Similarly you can’t know all the information you need or
where your search will lead you until it is underway. You can, however, narrow
your choices with some foresight and good planning. From libraries and the
Internet, to business and government sources, there’s no shortage of places to
find the right information on any subject. Begin with the places that will be of
most benefit for your topic.

THE INTERNET
These days, your research should definitely start online. (If you haven’t done this
before, get someone to help you.) Hundreds of millions of Web pages are
maintained by government agencies, universities, libraries, corporations,
organizations, and individuals. Some experts estimate that the amount of
information online is expanding at several pages per second. You can read and
download government reports, newspaper and magazine articles, research
studies, even the full text of books. While it can’t supplant libraries and other
sources of detailed information (at least not yet), using the Web for research is
like shopping at a flea market. Every page is valuable to someone, but finding
what is meaningful to you often requires sorting through a lot of junk. Not every
source you find is reliable. Knowing a few shortcuts can save you valuable time.
Search Engines
No doubt you’ve already discovered the first major shortcut: search engines.
Search engines help you find more specific information on a subject. They
constantly scan the Web to create indexes of information. When you type in a
word or phrase and hit the search button, the search engine creates a list of Web
pages that relate to your subject. Some popular search engines include:
Google (www.google.com)

This is the granddaddy of them all, and the most comprehensive. When you
look something up on Google, you’ll find links organized from the most to least
relevant. Frame your search parameters carefully: “Julia Roberts as Erin
Brockovich” will find those pages that list the two names together. If you’re
writing an article on how Julia Roberts’s starring role as Erin Brockovich
transformed her image from toothsome movie star to serious actress, you don’t
want to have to wade through the hundreds of fan pages you’d find by just
typing in “Julia Roberts.”
Google’s ambitious drive to be one-stop shopping for all conceivable
information on the Internet has led it to create several initiatives that may also
prove useful for your research:
Google Alerts allow you to choose any phrase and receive a daily digest email of all of the links to pages where that phrase has been used in a day.
Authors may wish to put a Google Alert on a subject or individual they are
currently researching to monitor any developing stories. If you’re working
on a profile article about an innovative Wall Street entrepreneur, for
instance, you will want to put a Google Alert on her name to receive any
news stories that mention her. www.google.com/alerts
Google Book Search allows you to search millions of books that Google
has scanned and posted online. This effort started with the classics—older,
out-of-print books in the public domain—but soon mushroomed to include
just about anything with printed words between two covers. Can’t find the
quote you put into your article but know you need to give a citation for it?
Try typing it verbatim into the Book Search: Google will show you a
facsimile of the page where it can be found and all the bibliographic
information, so you don’t have to spend two hours frantically searching for
the quote in every book you own. http://books.google.com
Like Google Books, Google Scholar gives you access to nonbook research
information, especially more academic and specialized sources like journal

articles,

theses,

dissertations,

abstracts,

and

the

like.

http://scholar.google.com
Google Translate is precisely what it sounds like: an instant translator. It’s
not quite up to the futuristic standards of Star Trek’s Universal Translator,
but it’s getting there, with more languages being added all the time. This
can save you tremendous time and expense if you’re doing historical
research and some of your documents are in German, or you’re writing a
travel guide to Botswana and never mastered Setswana. The prose Google
spits back may not be elegant, but you will get the basic meaning.
http://translate.google.com
Google Maps and Google Earth can help you in unexpected ways with your
writing. What if you’re writing a novel set in Paris but can’t quite
remember the street layout from your character’s hotel to the café where
she first encounters her soul mate over crème brÛlée? Use Google Maps
(http://maps.google.com) to get your heroine from place to place and
Google Earth (http://earth.google.com) to zoom in on the café, reminding
yourself of the sights, buildings, and flower vendors all around it. These
tools are fantastic for helping to evoke a setting.
Google Blog Search allows you to search the blogs of ordinary people for
your research. This is especially useful if you want to add a personal
component to a story you are writing. For example, if you were doing a
piece on Lyme disease for a health magazine, you would of course research
your topic in science journals, medical websites, and the like. But if you
also want to hear from ordinary people who are suffering from the disease,
you could run a blog search on Lyme disease and hear what individual
people have experienced. This can be a great way to find interview subjects,
too, since people who are willing to blog publicly about a subject are often
also willing to talk about it with a writer. http://blogsearch.google.com
Google Images is a search engine specifically designed for JPEGs, TIFFs,
and other art formats. This is where you go if you want to find a photograph

of someone, a book or album cover, or clip art. (Remember that most of
these images are copyright protected, so you will need to double-click on
the picture to find out where it came from and then contact the rights holder
listed.) http://images.google.com
Yahoo! Search (www.search.yahoo.com)
Yahoo may not be quite as big as Google, but its boast of “twenty billion web
objects” is certainly nothing to sneeze at. You can find just about anything you
want to with this tool, as with Google. Yahoo also has some special tricks up its
sleeve:
Yahoo People Search is like the white pages and yellow pages combined in
a national database. If you know the last name and state of the person
you’re seeking, you will probably be able to find him. But what makes the
Yahoo tool particularly helpful is the e-mail search feature. If your quarry
has an e-mail address that is publicly listed anywhere (e.g., at the university
where he teaches or the law firm where she practices), Yahoo People Search
will come up trumps. http://people.yahoo.com
Yahoo Video, like Google Images, is a specialized search engine—in this
case, one that is designed specifically to trawl through streaming video.
Want to find an interview with an author or celebrity? A clip of the
president giving the State of the Union address? This is where you want to
be. http://video.search.yahoo.com
Specialized Search Engines
In addition to the general, big-picture searches you can do with Google and
other engines, there are also subject-specific search engines. They can help you
hone in on Web pages more likely to cover your topic in detail. Some popular
specialized search engines and directories include:
Academic Info (www.academicinfo.net). This site provides educational
information, online courses, and comprehensive subject guides on an

enormous range of topics.
Infomine (http://infomine.ucr.edu). Like Academic Info, this emphasizes
scholarly resources like journal articles but also includes government
documents and more.
LawCrawler (www.lawcrawler.com). Does your mystery novel have
characters embroiled in a last-will-and-testament court battle? Find legal
precedents, case briefs, and even expert witnesses at this site.
U.S. National Library of Medicine (www.nlm.nih.gov). Run by the National
Institutes of Health, this site offers comprehensive medical information,
including fascinating details on the history of medicine in America, current
research and treatments, and public health.

LIBRARIES
For most topics, a library is a great place to conduct research. After all, libraries
hold the cumulative written knowledge of our entire history and civilization.
Practically nothing is known that cannot be found in a library somewhere. Best
of all, there are guides (research librarians and reference librarians) to point you
in the right direction. Thanks to interlibrary loans, virtually no volume is beyond
your reach. With directories on the Internet, searching for reference materials in
the library system has never been easier.
There are three types of libraries: public libraries, college libraries, and
specialized libraries maintained by industries or special interest groups. The
federal government is another leading source of information, but many of its
publications are also available in larger libraries.
Public Libraries
These are usually the best places for conducting research. The selection of
material is unmatched by any suburban branch location (though if you know
what you want you can often have it sent from the main library to the branch

near you). The reference librarian at your local library is a valuable source of
information. Many accept phone calls and e-mails from patrons asking research
questions, so long as the questions are specific and can be answered quickly.
College Libraries
A library at a large institution will have more resources available than most
branches of your public library. Colleges and public university libraries are
usually open to the public, though you may not be able to withdraw a book
unless you are affiliated with the school. In addition to the central campus library
at most universities, many of the academic departments have their own
specialized libraries, which may be open to the public.
Specialized Libraries
There are thousands of special libraries throughout the United States. While
their collections may be limited to certain subjects, many offer an unparalleled
amount of information on their specific subject matter, be it medicine,
engineering, history, or art. Most are open to the public at least on a limited
basis, though you will probably need permission in advance to gain access. Even
those that aren’t normally open to the public likely will allow you access if you
explain the nature of your research. You can find out about special libraries in
the Directory of Special Libraries and Information Centers or in the Subject
Directory of Special Libraries and Information Centers. Both volumes are
available at larger public libraries. The Special Libraries Association
(www.sla.org) also may be of assistance.

BUSINESS AND GOVERNMENT SOURCES
Businesses
Businesses routinely make information available through their public
relations offices, customer service departments, and sales staffs. Many trade
associations also can provide you with valuable material, including chambers of
commerce and tourism offices at the state and local level. In fact, many exist

primarily to disseminate information and are often eager to provide writers with
information. Don’t hesitate to contact these people; they can be an enormous
help. Three books that list thousands of these viable information sources include
Encyclopedia of Associations: International Organizations, Encyclopedia of
Associations: National Organizations of the U.S., and Encyclopedia of
Associations: Regional, State and Local Organizations.
Federal Government Information
There are several sources for government publications. You can contact the
authoring agency directly or use any number of government outlets that serve as
information clearinghouses. In many instances, the cost to purchase government
documents can be prohibitive. Fortunately many documents are available for
free viewing at public libraries or at thousands of other depositories throughout
the country. The Monthly Catalog of U.S. Government Publications, published
by the U. S. Government Printing Office, is one way to find what you need. The
GPO’s Subject Bibliography Index lists thousands of publications by category.
To inquire about government documents, try the following agencies:
The Federal Citizen Information Center (www.pueblo.gsa.gov) serves as a
single point of contact for people who have questions about any federal
agency. Its information specialists can also help you locate government
documents and publications.
The U.S. Census Bureau (www.census.gov) has thousands of reports about
the U.S. population and economy. It offers statistics on such diverse subjects
as fertility, education, mining, ancestry, income, migration, school
enrollment, construction, and international trade. You can access data
through more than two thousand libraries and other locations that serve as
data centers and federal depositories.
The U.S. Government Accountability Office (www.gao.gov) is the
investigative arm of Congress that compiles reports on all aspects of

government. All of GAO’s unclassified reports are available to the public.
Known as the “watchdog” of the U.S. Government, the GAO is a good place
to go if you need information about government spending, fraud, legal
decisions, or other controversies, from salmonella scares to aviation crash
reports.
The U.S. Government Printing Office (www.access.gpo.gov) is the largest
distributor of government documents. The GPO provides information to
designated libraries and other locations throughout the country, where you
can view the information for free.
The National Technical Information Service (www.ntis.gov) distributes
scientific, technical, and engineering documents.

RESEARCH TIPS AND TRICKS
While it’s fairly easy to write out a list of places to get information, what to do
when you get there is another story. There is more than one path to the same
point, and some are quicker than others. Think of unique ways to get the
information you need, and think of unique ways to use the information you get.
In other words, be as creative in your research as you are in your writing. Use
the tips and tricks listed below to help you find the best research path possible.
Work from the general to the specific. Look for general background
information first. Use that to better define your search and begin to look for
more specific information.
Develop a rapport with the reference or research librarians at your local
library. They live to help people find information. (Be sure to hit the
highlights yourself first; it would be a real waste of a librarian’s time if you
haven’t so much as Googled your topic yet. Save the librarian as your
backup plan when you’ve exhausted your options or hit a wall with your
research.)

Scan the table of contents of books you think might be relevant. If you are
doing this online, try using Amazon.com’s “Look Inside” feature to give
you a sense of the book before buying.
To get a quick overview of a large book or document, check the index for a
list of illustrations, charts, tables, or graphs. Lengthy, complicated subjects
are often summarized with charts and graphs. This is especially true of
government and scientific documents. If you find a graphic that is of
particular interest, scan the text pages around it for related details. Also
look for an executive summary or introduction at the front of the document
and conclusion statements at the end of each section.
If you have trouble finding information on your subject, it could be you are
using the wrong search words. Check your words against the subject
heading list in the directory you are searching.
When retrieving your books from the library shelves, browse nearby books
to see if any others might be useful. Library shelves are arranged so that
nonfiction books about the same topic are generally kept near each other.
Keep a list of what you find and where you found it. You may need to go
back to it later.
A volume number usually refers to the year that a periodical was published.
Volume 10 refers to a magazine in its tenth year of publication.
When you need facts, assume that there is a reference source that has what
you need. There nearly always is.
Most books and many articles themselves have bibliographies that list
additional sources of information. By following these leads you can amass a
body of information quickly.

Part 7
REVISION:
How Your Story Comes Together

Chapter 34

HOW TO GAIN PERSPECTIVE ON YOUR WORK
BY ELIZABETH SIMS
Throughout my childhood my mother gave me dolls and my father gave me
puzzles: a typical parental dichotomy.
I ignored the dolls and went for the puzzles, in spite of not being very fast at
figuring them out. Which led my dad to give me still more of them: jigsaws,
table mazes, wire contraptions and carved wooden figure puzzles. Whenever I’d
get frustrated and throw one down, Dad would just say, “Try it again later.”
Feeling hopelessly dumb, I’d run outside to ride my bike or find a friend to
harass.
Hours or days later, I’d pick up the puzzle again. To my invariable surprise,
this time I’d get further. I could see it better. Suddenly it would seem obvious
that this double-wedge piece of wood was the key to the whole little elephant, or
that if you twisted your fingers just so, the heart would detach from the ring all
by itself.
What had happened? The puzzle hadn’t changed; I was the same kid.
Wasn’t I?
Yet somehow I had become less dumb (as I saw it). I never knew what to
make of the phenomenon until I became a writer and had to work out problems I
found in my stories—in other words, to revise.
Revision, every writing coach will tell you, means “to see anew” or “to visit
again.”
But what does that really mean?

We all instinctively know that when you work on a thing for a long time,
your feeling for it can get stale, and eventually your efforts reach a point of
diminishing returns. And we know that when you walk away temporarily, you
give yourself a chance to come back to the work with a new eye—a fresh eye.
When you do that, your work now looks somewhat different. You’re seeing it
from a new angle. You’ve gained perspective.
How do you know when you need perspective on a particular piece of
writing?
You’ve submitted your piece a bunch of times and it’s gotten nowhere.
Your revision has lost energy and direction, but still feels incomplete.
You’re getting consistent feedback that your writing needs work. (Notice I
say “consistent.” More on that later.)
You’ve come down with CRD—Creeping Rot Disease, which strikes all authors
now and then, making us feel as if what we have spent so much time and effort
on is nothing but junk.
Gaining perspective may well be the most important part of revision—and it
can often be the most difficult. Fortunately there are several methods that can
guide you, no matter what type of writing you do.

GETTING DISTANCE
The most obvious—and easiest!—way to gain perspective is to put your work
away for a while.
The truth is, no one knows how taking a break frees up the mind, but it does:
Somehow it freshens our little neurons, or perhaps it prompts the brain to create
more cleverness molecules.
If you can bear to let a short piece sit a week and a book-length work a
month, do so. Longer is fine, too; some authors have abandoned manuscripts for
years before unearthing them and realizing, Hey, this isn’t bad, and renewing
their energy for the project.

But even just a couple of days totally away from your first draft can help.
Your brain needs a rest from the whole damn thing. Therefore, physically getting
away from your project isn’t enough; you also need to stop yourself from
thinking about it. If you spend your “break” reflecting on it, obsessing about it,
turning over the same problems in your mind, you’re not going to be fresh when
you come back to it.
How do you take your mind off your work?
Trying to force thoughts out of your mind rarely goes well, but you can seek
a state where you’re not judging things as good or bad, but allowing everything
simply to be.
Directing your attention to something else works wonders for this. Which
brings me to a second key aspect of gaining perspective and preparing to revise.

SHARPENING YOUR SAW
You may have heard the expression “sharpening your saw.”
That is, you can keep sawing away with a blade that’s becoming duller and
duller the more you bear down on it, or you can stop your work, step away, and
sharpen your blade so that when you use it again, the work goes better and with
less effort. Sometimes we are reluctant to sharpen our saw because we don’t
want to leave the work—we confuse stopping to do essential maintenance with
quitting. But really, it must be done. Your writing mind gets dull, even
fragmented. Sharpening your saw is a vital step to take between writing “The
End” and beginning revisions. You need to regain your keenness.
What are some ways to sharpen your saw?
SEEK. I’m a big believer in getting outdoors, as were Thoreau, Hemingway, and
many other authors. If you can afford to take a few days entirely away, spending
time in the natural world reconnects you with your calm, clear inner core. A
backpacking or camping trip, either solo or not, can help center you and restore

your mind to wholeness. Alternatively go for a day hike, engage in your favorite
sport, or just take a walk around your neighborhood.
CLEAN. Tidy up your writing space. Throw out junk paper, file the rest, and act
on the pending tasks you’ve been putting off. Vacuum the crumbs and open the
window.
ORGANIZE. Shape up your books. Shelve the ones that are lying all over the
place, cull some to sell, and make room on your shelves for new ones. Clearing
stuff out in general has metaphorical value as well as practical.
READ SOMEBODY ELSE. When in need of perspective, I find it both
comforting and refreshing to pick up a favorite book from the past, be it a classic
like Wise Blood or a trash masterpiece like Valley of the Dolls, and take a spin
with a friend I can trust.
DO SOMETHING ELSE CREATIVE. Draw or paint, even if you haven’t
done it since way back in art class. The act of putting up an easel and squeezing
some colors onto a palette is a tremendously exciting thing to do. Grab a brush
and lay on some paint. You’ll be using a totally different part of your mind.
Alternatively try your hand at a new craft project. Or if you play a musical
instrument, pick it up.
BEGIN. Start a completely different writing project. It doesn’t matter what, as
long as it’s new. Sometimes writing a short story is the perfect follow-up to
finishing a novel. Or if you’ve finished an essay or article, you might just have
the momentum to grab a fresh stack of paper and boldly throw down the words
“Chapter One.”
BRAINSTORM. If you don’t want to begin a new project, just consider ideas
for new material. Do character sketches, dream up a list of heart-clutching
moments, ask yourself what you want to write about. What ideas, themes, or
grudges have been banging around inside you?

No matter how you do it, when you give your conscious mind a break from the
writing you’ll soon revise, you turn over your work to your subconscious. That’s
good because your subconscious is where your magic lives. While you’re trying
to outsmart a trout or swinging your staff along a trail or stopping to watch a
flock of kids on the playground, your story is still inside you, taking shape,
settling, flying, settling again, resolving.
And when you bring your conscious mind back to it, you’ll see things you
didn’t see before. You’ll perceive better how to exploit the strong parts, and
you’ll see more clearly what to cut, what to fix, why and how. You’ll gain
confidence.
When you’re finally feeling ready to return to your work, don’t start with
page 1 just yet. As we know, the main reason you get dull is you’ve gotten too
familiar with your material. So, just before you begin revising, try reading parts
of your work out of sequence. This takes away context, which allows you to see
the writing from a new angle. It’s the difference between meeting a new person
at some fancy function, all dressed up and scented, and meeting that same person
in the sauna at the gym. Context can distract us from essence.

GAINING AN OUTSIDE PERSPECTIVE
The most time-honored way to gain perspective is to borrow another set of eyes.
To beta test—a term from the computer world—means to try out a not-final
version on volunteer end users. The ideal beta reader is someone who: a) you
know is a discriminating reader, and b) cares about you. That is, someone who at
heart wants you to succeed as a writer.
The main, open-ended question you want to ask a beta reader is, “What did
you think of it?” Make it clear that you want to hear it straight, good or bad.
Sometimes you’ll hear vagueness like, “It was different!” or, “I really liked it,”
or, “I don’t know, I couldn’t get into it.” Such feedback is essentially worthless.
To avoid this, coach your beta readers in advance by saying, “I’m just going to

want to know wherever you went over a bump.” That way they’ll feel free to say
they were uncomfortable with a scene, or felt something didn’t work, without
fearing that you’re going to expect a step-by-step dissertation.
Then, when you sit down to get feedback, ask directed questions, questions
that get your readers to comment on specific aspects of what they’ve just read.
Let’s say you’re in doubt about a particular scene or chapter. Ask:
How did you feel when you read this scene?
What did you like about it?
What didn’t you like about it?
Did you ever get bored? Where?
What part made you feel the most emotion? How come?
Then you can dig deeper into their gut reactions on the work as a whole. Readers
love stories that make them feel. So zero in on their emotions:
Did you feel dread anyplace? Horror?
Did you get grossed out by anything? Was it a good gross-out or a bad
gross-out?
Did you feel stirred romantically? Whether yes or no, tell me more.
Did you stay up reading later than you intended?
Did you learn anything new?
Was it ever a slog?
Did the characters come alive? Which one seemed most alive? Which least?
Do you feel you can clearly see them?
And then: What is X character like? (I have found this question to be especially
rewarding. Readers have different takes on characters, and there have been times
I’ve learned that my characters are coming across in ways I hadn’t known,
sometimes quite differently than I’d intended. Sometimes a reader sees depth in
a character that I myself missed! With unique feedback like that, you’ll be able
to populate your fiction more realistically.)

Needless to say, be receptive. You don’t have to agree with everything, but
don’t waste time defending or explaining your work. A useful response is,
“Thank you, I’ll think about it. What else?”
Remember earlier I mentioned consistency of feedback?
The responses you receive may be all over the map. You will hear variation
after variation, and some of those variations may be exactly contradictory.
For example, from Reader A: “I like how your beginning gradually builds
speed, but you didn’t play fair with that random explosion at the end.”
Reader B: “The beginning was slow, but you ended with a terrific bang!”
If you start rewriting in response to the specifics of every critique you
receive, you risk eventually being driven to put a bullet through your brain. Be a
bit cagey when taking comments. But if you start hearing similar criticism from
multiple sources, sit up and pay attention. If, after considering the feedback, you
think it has merit, go ahead and revise your work accordingly.
Still, you must trust your own internal writerly core above all.
I’ve kept notes from a years-ago phone conversation with a powerful figure
in publishing who told me my novel was awful. I’d better stop submitting it, she
said, and get some remedial training in storytelling.
I didn’t listen. I knew in my heart that she was wrong, that my novel was
publishable—if not the next Light in August—and, moreover, the other feedback
I’d gotten on it didn’t remotely reflect what she’d said. I soon sold the
manuscript to another publisher.
On the other hand, when my agent talks, I listen, even though she’s only one
person. I listen very hard. Why? Because: a) she’s made a career out of
distinguishing great writing from the mediocre, and b) she can articulate exactly
why a particular plot point or passage of writing works or doesn’t work for her.
We don’t always agree, but I give her opinions a great deal of weight.
In the end, consider what Jack Kerouac told The Paris Review: “I spent my
entire youth writing slowly with revisions and endless rehashing speculation and
deleting and got so I was writing one sentence a day and the sentence had no

feeling. Goddamn it, feeling is what I like in art, not craftiness and the hiding of
feelings.”
Then he wrote On the Road.
Don’t make too much of revising.
ELIZABETH SIMS (elizabethsims.com) is a contributing editor for Writer’s Digest Magazine.
She’s the award-winning author of seven novels and many short stories, poems, and articles.

Chapter 35

FIRE UP YOUR FICTION: FOUR TECHNIQUES
BY DONALD MAASS
Many fiction manuscripts submitted to my literary agency feel lackluster. Much
genre fiction feels tired. Many mainstream and literary novels also strike me as
stale. Even when well written, too often manuscripts fail to engage and excite
me.
What is missing when a manuscript hugs the wall and refuses to dance?
Originality is not the key. It can’t be, otherwise no wounded detective would
ever have a chance and every new vampire series would be dead on arrival. Even
overpublished clichés can sometimes break out and sell big. The same is true of
look-alike mainstream and literary fiction.
The issue, then, is not whether a story has a cool new premise. Whether
hiking a well-worn trail or blazing uncharted wilderness, when a manuscript
succeeds it is invariably fired by inspiration. Passion comes through on the page.
How does that passion get there? Here are some exercises to apply to your
novel-in-progress. They are designed to dig up what matters in your story and
infuse it in your manuscript in effective—but not obvious—ways.

FIND THE UNCOMMON IN COMMON EXPERIENCE
To get passion into your story, do it through your characters. What angers you
can anger them. What lifts them up will inspire us in turn. Even ordinary people
can be poets, prophets, and saints. That’s true in life, so why not in your fiction?
Here is an exercise designed to discover and utilize what is universal in the
experience of your characters, especially when they are regular folk like you and
me.

Write down what comes to mind when you read the prompts below.
1. Is your story realistic? Are your characters ordinary people?
2. What in the world of your story makes you angry? What are we not seeing?
What is the most important question? What puzzle has no answer? What is
dangerous in this world? What causes pain?
3. Where in the world of your story is there unexpected grace? What is
beautiful? Who is an unrecognized hero? What needs to be saved?
4. Give your feelings to a character. Who can stand for something? Who can
turn the plot’s main problem into a cause?
5. Create a situation in which this character must defend, explain or justify his
actions. How is the plot’s main problem larger than it looks? Why does it
matter to us all?
6. Find places in your manuscript to incorporate the emotions, opinions, and
ideas generated in the prompts above.

FIND THE COMMON IN UNCOMMON EXPERIENCE
What if your protagonist is already a genuine hero? If your hero or heroine is an
above-average, courageous, principled and unstoppable doer of good, then you
may believe that you don’t have a problem. Cheering will begin automatically,
right?
Wrong. Perfect heroes and heroines are unrealistic. Readers know that. They
will not strongly bond with such characters. To connect, they need to feel that
such paragons are real.
That is also true for the world of your story. The rarefied stratosphere of
national politics, international intrigue, or any other out-of-the-ordinary milieu
will not draw readers in unless there they find some way to relate to it.
The following are steps you can take to humanize your hero and make the
exotic world of your story real for us ordinary mortals.

1. Is your story about uncommon events? Are your characters out of the
ordinary?
2. Find for your hero a failing that is human, a universal frustration, a
humbling setback, or any experience that everyone has had. Add this early
in the manuscript.
3. What in the world of the story is timelessly true? What cannot be changed?
How is basic human nature exhibited? What is the same today as one
hundred years ago and will be the same one hundred years ahead?
4. What does your protagonist do the same way everyone else does it? What is
his lucky charm? Give this character a motto. What did she learn from her
mom or dad?
5. Create a situation in which your exceptional protagonist is in over his head,
feels unprepared, is simply lost, or in any other way must admit to himself
that he’s not perfect.
6. Find places in your manuscript to incorporate the results of the steps above.

DEVELOP THE MORAL OF THE STORY
What if your novel already has a driving message? Suppose its purpose is in
some way to wake us up? That’s great, but your message will harden your
readers’ hearts if you lecture or preach. To avoid that, let your story itself be your
lesson. The teacher is your central plot problem. The students? Those are your
characters.
Here are ways to use those elements to get across your point.
1. Is there a moral or lesson in your story?
2. When does your protagonist realize she got something wrong?
3. Who in the story can, at the end, see things in a completely different way?
4. At the end, how is your hero or heroine better off?
5. At the end, what does your hero or heroine regret?

6. Who, in the midst of the story, is certain there is no solution, nor is there
any way to fully comprehend the problem?
7. Why is the problem good, timely, universal, or fated?
8. Find places in your manuscript to incorporate the results of the questions
above.

BUILD THE FIRE IN FICTION
Did you ever get lost in the middle of writing a manuscript? Have you ever
wondered, deep in revisions, if your story holds together or any longer makes
sense? Have you ever lost steam?
Steal from life. That’s what it’s for, isn’t it? How often, when something bad
happened to you, did you think to yourself, at least this will be good material for
a story some day?
Well, now’s your chance. What has happened to you, its details and specifics,
are tools with which you can make every scene personal and powerful. Use the
following prompts whenever you are stuck, or if inspiration simply is low.
1. Choose any scene that seems weak or wandering. Who is the point-of-view
character?
2. Identify whatever this character feels most strongly in this scene. Fury?
Futility? Betrayal? Hope? Joy? Arousal? Shame? Grief? Pride? Selfloathing? Security?
3. Recall your own life. What was the time when you most strongly felt the
emotion you identified in the last step?
4. Detail your own experience: When precisely did this happen? Who was
there? What was around you? What do you remember best about the
moment? What would you most like to forget? What was the quality of the
light? What exactly was said? What were the smallest and largest things
that were done?

5. In this experience from your life, what twisted the knife or put the icing on
the cake? It would have stirred this feeling anyway, but what really
provoked it was … what?
6. What did you think to yourself as the importance of this experience struck
you?
7. Give the details of your experience to your character, right now, in this very
scene.
DONALD MAASS is the founder of Donald Maass Literary Agency, which sells more than 150
novels every year. He is the author of Writing the Breakout Novel, The Fire in Fiction, and The
Breakout Novelist.

Chapter 36

WHAT TO DO WHEN YOUR NOVEL STALLS
BY JOHN DUFRESNE
There are precious few experiences quite as exhilarating as diving headlong into
your new novel. You write your opening sentence, and you’re off. Immediately
you’re imagining a brave new world and creating goodly creatures to inhabit it.
You find yourself an inquisitive stranger in this newfound land. Your job here at
the outset is to wonder and to wander, to make yourself susceptible to the
provocations of this exotic place, to absorb the rich and telling details, to
welcome interaction with all these fascinating made-up people, and to follow
your curiosity wherever it leads. You can’t wait to see what’s around the next
corner, behind the next door, or over the next mountain. The world opens itself
to you for its unmasking, as Kafka said it would.
You give your darlings one problem after another, because you know that
writing a novel is taking the path of most resistance. You trail along behind your
characters, writing down what they do. They surprise you, they delight you, and
they alarm you. The story intensifies, the themes resonate and the mystery
deepens. You think, This novel-writing business is such a blast! Not all of the
writing has made it to the page just yet, but it’s all there in your copious notes.
You’re writing serenely every day. You’re coming to know your characters’
secrets, their dreams, and their shame. You’re feeling clever, invigorated, and
beneficent. But writing a novel is a marathon, and it can be difficult to sustain
the composure, drive, and passion that inspired and launched the project. Today
you’re sputtering a bit. That subplot you constructed isn’t panning out the way
you had hoped it would. Bit of a dead end, really.

Not only that, now you realize that all of those problems you slapped your
hero with need to be addressed, if not resolved. You put down your pen and
scratch your head. Here you are in the middle of your novel, and you’re not sure
where it’s going. And that character who you were certain was going to shine so
brightly has dimmed, hasn’t he?
Your graceful and sleek narrative turns out to be ragged and shapeless. It’s
just one thing after another, isn’t it? You need a plot. You knew you would. You
do know what a plot is—a central character wants something, goes after it
despite opposition, and as a result of a struggle, comes to win or lose—so why
can’t you write one?
There is no experience quite so humbling and disheartening as the inevitable
creative slump that arrives in the middle of writing your novel. It’s the price you
pay for your hubris. You’re in the doldrums now, adrift, and you’re starting to
panic because you’ve invested so much time and energy, and you’d hate to see it
all go to waste. (It won’t, of course, because everything you write today informs
everything you will ever write. But that’s no consolation because right now
you’re thinking you may never write again.)
Your confidence flags, your resolve weakens. You’re losing faith in your
material. You’re intimidated by the magnitude of the undertaking, shamed by
your vaulting ambition. What had seemed like an exciting and noble endeavor
now seems foolish and impossible. And so you put pressure on yourself, which
leads to your reliance on habitual thinking and rational problem solving, neither
of which will get your novel written. Because a novel is not a quadratic equation.
You’re not solving for x.
This setback is part of the process. So relax. Remember that no matter how
much you have revised and polished as you’ve been going along, if you haven’t
reached the end—and you haven’t—you’re still writing a first draft. And first
drafts are explorations and are for your eyes only. Don’t expect to get it right;
just try to get it written. Expecting too much from an early draft results in

frustration and disappointment. You write a first draft in order to have something
to revise. It will be a failure. Writers are the ones who don’t let failure stop them.
Beginnings are relatively easy because they come out of nowhere. You start
writing before you even know where you’re going. And even endings can seem
to write themselves, following as they do on preceding events and having
nothing to foreshadow. It’s here in the middle where things get dicey. The
muddle in the middle is what separates writers from those who want to have
written.
When you’re mired like this, slog on! The only thing you can’t do is stop. If
you’re lost, don’t wait for rescue: No one’s coming. Get moving! Write, don’t
think! If your car won’t start, you don’t go back into the house, have a coffee,
read the paper, stroll back out and expect the engine to fire. No, you look under
the hood. You get your hands dirty. So let’s look under the hood.

1. PUT IT IN PARK
First, this might be a good time to take a short break from your manuscript. Try
this: Reread a novel by an author you admire, if for no other reason than to
remind yourself of the significance, beauty, and nobility of what you’re trying to
do. It’s your favorite novel or it’s the novel that made you want to be a writer in
the first place. Read with a pen in your hand and take notes on scenes,
characters, language, point of view, and so on. Keep a list of everything this
writer did that you can emulate in your novel. When you finish reading, write
down what you’ve learned from the novel and what you will apply to your
writing. And then get back to work.

2. RECHARGE THE BATTERY
Turn your attention back to your own work-in-progress. What you need in order
to persevere is enthusiasm. You have to be excited again by your characters and
themes, and by the nut of the nascent narrative. You should enjoy and relish what
it was in your characters that first aroused your fervor, the qualities that struck

you about them and to which you felt your enthusiasm respond from the get-go.
Any time you start to feel your creative spirits fade, stop and remember why you
started this journey in the first place: You wanted to get to know these people
who intrigued you. What was so beguiling about them? Why were you
fascinated? Go there. If you don’t already have a notebook where you record
notes for your work, designate one now, and write your answers to all these
questions in its pages.

3. RUN DIAGNOSTICS
Now it’s time to dig deeper. Ask yourself why you’re bogged down, and answer
honestly—in writing.
Maybe you think you don’t know your hero well enough to know what she’ll
do next. Well, here’s your chance to spend some time with her. Ask her what’s
on her mind, and write down what she tells you. Are you buying it? Is she
holding back? Why would she do that? Ask her to tell you something about
herself that you don’t know, a secret about a secret. Ask the questions provoked
by her revelation, and answer those questions as specifically as you can. Send
her on a trip. Where does she choose to go? Why there? Does she travel alone or
with someone? Talk about movies, discuss politics, gossip about the other
characters in the novel. Ask her, “Why do you think Bob hasn’t returned your
call?”
Or maybe you think what you’re writing about is not important enough, and
irrelevance is giving you an excuse to quit. You don’t care whodunit anymore!
Not so fast. Return to your notebook. Write about what keeps you up at night,
what you’re afraid of, what you don’t want to know about yourself. Write about
what you’re ashamed of. If you think there is evil in the world, give that evil a
shape. Write about what makes the world a miserable place. And then, once
you’ve realized that you do care after all, work what you’ve unearthed into your
draft.

Another common reason for stalling midnovel is that not knowing the ending
is making you crazy. The key is to recognize that often the ending is implicit in
the beginning. Go back to your opening chapter and see if you’ve left yourself
any clues. Then make an exhaustive list of possible endings. Pick the most
surprising one and write toward it, staying flexible as you go.

4. TAKE A TEST-DRIVE
Start reading your manuscript, beginning with your opening scene, and look for
moments there that are begging for embellishment, exploration, and resonance,
for opportunities that you wrote into the scenes but have yet to exploit. Now you
get to open those scenes up, not close them down. Often these moments are
those when you were surprised by what a character did or said. Or there might be
something, an image, a notion, a theme that you started in the opening that fades
away, fails to resonate. You need to see where you might reintroduce that
something.
Take note of places where you forget you’re reading and enter the world of
your book—the parts that are working. Examining the good passages will help
you strengthen the weak ones.
Each time you read the manuscript over, you’ll see something new. Note the
thematic connections, the narrative tangents. Listen to your story. Listen with a
pen in your hand and jot down notes. What is the novel trying to tell you?

5. REV THE ENGINE
Every novelist is a troublemaker, so make some trouble. Follow Raymond
Chandler’s advice and bring in a man with a gun. Actually any weapon will do.
Your man with a gun might, in fact, be a teenage girl armed with sarcasm. Or a
golden retriever that lopes up to your hero with a human foot in its mouth. As
you write about what happens next, you’re looking for moments that are beyond
what you thought was going on in your book. Let the phone ring at three in the
morning and have your hero answer and get the alarming news. Or maybe he’s

in his doctor’s office, and the doctor closes the door, sits back in her chair, picks
up the results of the biopsy, taps the file on the desk, clears her throat.
Ask yourself what else could possibly go wrong in your hero’s life—his car
breaks down; he loses his health insurance; his child is caught dealing dope; he’s
falsely accused of a crime; his mom’s been in an accident—any of the trouble
you’ve had in your life or that you are afraid will happen to you or to someone
you love. That’s exactly what makes a plot compelling—things that you would
not want your family to suffer through.

6. KEEP IT RUNNING
Now it dawns on you that writing a novel is itself very much a plot. Novels are
about characters who want something. And you want something, too—to
understand the lives of your own characters, which means resolving the trouble
in your protagonist’s life, which means completing the novel—and you want it
intensely. If you don’t finish, your life will be significantly diminished. And so
you pursue your goal and battle every obstacle, not the least of which is your
lack of confidence, your obstructionist tendencies, the world calling for your
attention, the chaos of the characters’ lives, those elusive words, the befuddling
muddle, and so on. You sit day after day. You struggle and at last you finish your
novel. Plot’s resolved.
JOHN DUFRESNE is a fiction teacher and author of Is Life Like This? A Guide to Writing Your
First Novel in Six Months. as well as several novels and short-story collections.

Chapter 37

KEEP YOUR STORY MOVING AT THE RIGHT PACE
BY JESSICA PAGE MORRELL
Pacing is a tool that controls the speed and rhythm at which a story is told and
the readers are pulled through the events. It refers to how fast or slow events in a
piece unfold and to how much time elapses in a scene or story. Pacing can also
be used to show characters aging and the effects of time on story events.
Pacing differs with the specific needs of a story. A far-reaching epic will
often be told at a leisurely pace, though it will speed up from time to time during
the most intense events. A short story or adventure novel might quickly jump
into action and deliver drama. Pacing is part structural choices and part word
choices, and uses a variety of devices to control how fast the story unfolds.
When driving a manual transmission car, you choose the most effective gear
needed for driving uphill, maneuvering city streets, or cruising down a freeway.
Similarly, when pacing your story, you need to choose the devices that move
each scene along at the right speed.

DEVICES FOR SPEEDING THINGS UP
You need speed in the opening, middle, and climax of your story. Sure, you’ll
slow down from time to time, especially to pause for significance and to express
characters’ emotions, but those times will usually appear just before or after a
joyride of skin-tightening speed.
There are lots of tools to hasten your story. Some are better suited for
micropacing—that is, line by line—and some are better suited for macropacing
—pacing the story as a whole. Let’s take a closer look at each device.

ACTION. Action scenes are where you “show” what happens in a story,
and, when written in short-and medium-length sentences, they move the
story along. Action scenes contain few distractions, little description, and
limited transitions. Omit or limit character thoughts, especially in the midst
of danger or crisis, since during a crisis people focus solely on survival. To
create poignancy, forgo long, descriptive passages and choose a few details
that serve as emotionally charged props instead.
CLIFF HANGERS. When the outcome of a scene or chapter is left
hanging, the pace naturally picks up because the reader will turn the page to
find out what happens next. Readers both love and hate uncertainty, and
your job is to deliver plenty of unfinished actions, unfilled needs, and
interruptions. Remember, cliff hangers don’t necessarily mean that you’re
literally dangling your character from a rooftop as the scene ends. If your
characters are in the midst of a conversation, end the scene with a
revelation, threat, or challenge.
DIALOGUE. Rapid-fire dialogue with little or no extraneous information
is swift and captivating, and will invigorate any scene. The best dialogue
for velocity is pared down, an abbreviated copy of real-life conversation
that snaps and crackles with tension. It is more like the volleying of PingPong or tennis than a long-winded discussion. Reactions, descriptions, and
attributions are minimal. Don’t create dialogue exchanges where your
characters discuss or ponder. Instead, allow them to argue, confront, or
engage in a power struggle.
PROLONGED OUTCOMES. Suspense and, by extension, forward
movement are created when you prolong outcomes. While it may seem that
prolonging an event would slow down a story, this technique actually
increases the speed, because the reader wants to know if your character is
rescued from the mountainside, if the vaccine will arrive before the
outbreak decimates the village, or if the detective will solve the case before
the killer strikes again.

SCENE CUTS. Also called a jump cut, a scene cut moves the story to a
new location and assumes the reader can follow without an explanation of
the location change. The purpose is to accelerate the story, and the
characters in the new scene don’t necessarily need to be the characters in
the previous scene.
A SERIES OF INCIDENTS IN RAPID SUCCESSION. Another means
of speeding up your story is to create events that happen immediately one
after another. Such events are presented with minimal or no transitions,
leaping via scene cuts from scene to scene and place to place.
SHORT CHAPTERS AND SCENES. Short segments are easily digested
and end quickly. Since they portray a complete action, the reader passes
through them quickly, as opposed to being bogged down by complex
actions and descriptions.
SUMMARY. Instead of a play-by-play approach, tell readers what has
already happened. Because scenes are immediate and sensory, they require
many words to depict. Summary is a way of trimming your word count and
reserving scenes for the major events. You can also summarize whole eras,
descriptions, and backstory. Summaries work well when time passes but
there is little to report, when an action is repeated or when a significant
amount of time has passed.
WORD CHOICE AND SENTENCE STRUCTURE. The language itself
is the subtlest means of pacing. Think concrete words (like prodigy and
iceberg), active voice (with potent verbs like zigzag and plunder), and
sensory information that’s artfully embedded. If you write long, involved
paragraphs, try breaking them up.
Fragments, spare sentences, and short paragraphs quicken the pace. Crisp,
punchy verbs, especially those with onomatopoeia (crash, lunge, sweep, scatter,
ram, scavenge) also add to a quick pace. Invest in suggestive verbs to enliven
descriptions, build action scenes and milk suspense.

Harsh consonant sounds such as those in words like claws, crash, kill, quake,
and nag can push the reader ahead. Words with unpleasant associations can also
ratchet up the speed: hiss, grunt, slither, smarmy, venomous, slaver, and wince.
Energetic, active language is especially appropriate for building action scenes
and suspense, and for setting up drama and conflict.
A fast pace means trimming every sentence of unnecessary words. Eliminate
prepositional phrases where you don’t need them: For example, “the walls of the
cathedral” can be written as “the cathedral’s walls.” Finally, search your story for
passive linking verbs and trade them in for active ones.

DEVICES FOR SLOWING THINGS DOWN
If your story zips ahead at full speed all the time, it might fizzle under this
excess. There are plenty of times and reasons for slowing down, especially to
emphasize a moment so readers can experience its emotional impact. There are
also times when a sedate or dignified pace is called for, or you want to build a
scene slowly to maximize the payoff. Readers want to relish lovemaking or
wedding scenes, especially if they come after hundreds of pages of the
characters being too afraid of their feelings to venture into the bedroom or walk
down the aisle. Readers also want to spend time at celebrations, funerals, and
births, and with characters who are gossiping or struggling with decisions.
Your job is to vary moods, tension, and pace. Readers don’t want to feel
intense emotions throughout the story. Too much intensity (and violence) creates
a kind of shell shock—readers shut down their emotions as a self-protective
measure. Provide readers with slower moments where emotional highs and lows
can be savored. Here are the perfect tools for just that:
DESCRIPTION. Description is an important tool for causing a reader to
linger amid the story world. But there is a fine line between just the right
amount of description and overkill. When possible, put description in
motion, as when a character is walking or driving through a place.

DISTRACTIONS. There are times when you want to distract the reader
with small actions, such as a character cooking or gardening, or with
weather or setting details. Distractions can be used to engage your reader’s
emotions. In the middle of an emotionally charged or pivotal scene, give
your character another task, such as applying makeup or looking out the
window.
EXPOSITION. Exposition breaks away from action to dispense
information. It can provide context and perspective, such as biographical or
geographical information, character descriptions, and time references.
Because straightforward exposition is so slow, trim it down to the
essentials. Blend in facts. Delivering exposition via dialogue, when it’s not
stilted, can accelerate the pace.
FLASHBACKS. Flashbacks halt the momentum of the front story. They
can be risky because they can slow the story too much or too often. If
flashbacks go on for pages or are not clearly linked to front-story events,
they can be especially troublesome. Deliberately place flashbacks to pause
and add insights.
INTROSPECTION. A viewpoint character’s thoughts or musings are
another device for slowing a scene. Avoid putting thoughts in quotation
marks or making references, such as, “Marty thought long and hard about
what do next.” Instead slip the thoughts in without announcing their
presence, so they mimic the character’s dialogue and reflect his mood.
ONE STEP FORWARD, ONE STEP BACK. Protagonists need to
stumble, make mistakes, experience reversals, and hit dead ends. If your
protagonist succeeds again and again, the story becomes both predictable
and too quickly paced. Troubles and setbacks slow the pace, increase
suspense, and keep readers interested.
SEQUELS. A sequel is the aftermath of an action scene. Sequels are staged
so your character can sort through her feelings, assess the changing
situation, and make decisions about what to do next. Not every scene

requires a sequel, but if characters never react to events or devise plans for
the future, the story will feel episodic and lack depth.
WORD CHOICE AND SENTENCE STRUCTURE. You can also slow
down a story on a word-by-word and sentence-by-sentence basis. Think of
the texture of sentences and call on all the senses for your purposes. In softsounding words, especially verbs (soothe, simper, stroke), the soft s and
vowels slow the pace. Repetition, lengthy sentences, and long paragraphs
also slacken the speed.
JESSICA PAGE MORRELL is a writing coach, freelance editor, corporate trainer, columnist, and
author of Between the Lines.

Revising to Improve Pace
One of your first editing tasks is to make certain your story contains all the scenes and
information necessary to tell the tale, and to be sure the pacing is varied and fast enough to
hold the reader’s interest. Use these tools to improve your pace as you revise:
Evaluate the length of your flashbacks. You want to enter a flashback at the last
possible moment, then leave as quickly as you can.
Analyze individual scenes that drag. Try tightening the dialogue and adjusting the
tension by adding surprises and tweaking details.
Examine the plot for places where you can withhold or delay the release of
information the reader needs to know. This can increase suspense and accelerate
the pace.
Scrutinize your final scenes, making certain they are trimmed of extraneous
information and don’t introduce new characters.
Make certain you have not used too many short sentences, because when
overused, they act like a series of speed bumps, slowing the story.
Heighten the emotional impact of scenes and influence the pace of your story by
using imagery, symbols and metaphor.

Chapter 38

PUT YOUR FICTION TO THE PLAUSIBILITY TEST
BY STEVE ALMOND
I’m afraid I’ll have to start my discussion of plausibility with a student story that
remains vivid to me after some five years.
I should preface my thoughts by noting how generally awesome my students
are. The notion that a 21-year-old would even attempt to write a short story, let
alone subject such work to the unpredictable blandishments of a workshop,
strikes me as ridiculously courageous. I didn’t work up the nerve to write fiction
until I was nearly thirty.
There’s very little a student can do in a story that would actually make me
angry. But I do get, uh, frustrated when I feel a student is failing to take his
characters seriously on some level. The chief symptom being that I just stop
believing them. They, and their world, become implausible.
This brings me to the story in question (I’ve forgotten the title), which was
about a teenager named John who tries—and fails—to commit suicide. He
wakes up in a hospital with his brother by his side.
The following things then happen:
1. John begins wisecracking with his brother.
2. His brother describes John’s suicide note as “funny.”
3. A nurse appears and treats John with blistering scorn.
4. His brother jokingly threatens to “tell mom and dad” about the suicide
attempt.
5. John and his brother sneak out of the hospital.
6. John commits suicide.

I’m not sure where to start.
There are technical implausibilities (the story is told from John’s perspective,
and yet he winds up dead) and practical ones (the authorities would be legally
bound to inform the parents, and John would be placed on suicide watch). But
more disturbing are the emotional issues. Would John and his brother actually
crack wise in the wake of a suicide attempt serious enough to require
hospitalization? Would a nurse verbally abuse him?
Of course, John and his brother might engage in sardonic banter as a way of
keeping their true feelings at bay. But the story contains no trace of those true
feelings. The story is a tragedy posing as a farce.

COMMON PLAUSIBILITY FLAWS
The question of plausibility is central when it comes to fiction. Can you induce
the reader to believe? More precisely, to suspend her disbelief?
All readers come to fiction as willing accomplices to your lies. Such is the
basic goodwill contract made the moment we pick up a work of fiction. We
know Elizabeth Bennet isn’t a real person. But because Jane Austen describes
her world (both internal and external) with such fidelity and elegance, Ms.
Bennet comes to feel real.
If the reader stops believing, even for an instant, you’ve broken the spell. As
I suggested earlier, there are several common types of plausibility flaws that can
cause this.
FACTUAL: Simply put, you don’t do your research. You place the Grand
Canyon in Nevada. Or you write a story about an indigenous Amazonian culture
based on “a cool article” you read a decade ago that’s now hopelessly outdated.
These are mistakes born of laziness (my favorite attribute!) that are relatively
easy to correct.
LOGISTICAL: Here the problem isn’t research but an insufficient immersion
in the fictional world. If your hero is a poverty-stricken dreamer, that kindly

bank officer simply isn’t going to lend him money—no matter how much you’d
like him to.
TECHNICAL: These flaws are the result of basic misunderstandings about
craft. If your story is written from the point of view of a sexually frustrated
mailman—as so many of mine are—your narrator can’t suddenly leap into the
mind of his ex-wife without losing the reader.
EMOTIONAL/PSYCHOLOGICAL: This is by far the most serious breach of
plausibility, and the most common. The question here is motivation: why your
characters do the things they do. The essential failure of the story about suicidal
John is that the author never provided us any sense of why the kid wanted to take
his life. John acted not because he had a complex, tortured internal life, but
because the author made him act. He wasn’t a person. He was a puppet.
And it’s not enough to tell the reader about a character’s feelings. We must be
made to share in those feelings. The key to ensuring a reader’s undying devotion
is to implicate him in the fears and desires of your characters. The unnerving
power of a novel such as Lolita is that we conspire in Humbert Humbert’s illicit
(and illegal) passion for his pubescent paramour.

SECRETS TO SUSPENDING DISBELIEF
This is all fine and well, but isn’t there a risk to fretting over plausibility—
namely that you inhibit your imagination? What about magical realism or
science fiction? What about those stories that joyously throw conventional
reality out the window?
I say more power to them, actually.
One of my favorite books on Earth is Kurt Vonnegut’s Slaughterhouse-Five.
It’s a book about the horrors of war, specifically the firebombing of Dresden
during World War II. But it’s predicated on the premise that our hero, Billy
Pilgrim, has become “unstuck in time” after being abducted by space aliens.

Clearly Vonnegut didn’t give a damn about “plausibility” in his books, right?
Wrong. Vonnegut goes to great pains to ensure that the alternate world he’s
constructed is believable. We learn about the aliens, their physiology and moral
philosophy, why they’ve come to Earth and why they’ve chosen to abduct Billy.
Billy’s life on Earth is portrayed in meticulous and convincing detail.
The same is true of the remarkable Gabriel García Márquez short story “A
Very Old Man with Enormous Wings.” The triggering event is the appearance of
a very old man with enormous wings who falls from the sky and lands in a small
village. Márquez provides no final explanation for this event. But what’s most
important is that the villagers treat the event as real, a source of genuine
bafflement and wonder.
The lesson is this: Readers will happily suspend their disbelief (even in the
face of space aliens and angels) if they feel their emotional and logistical
questions have been addressed, and if the world they encounter feels internally
consistent. In the end, plausibility in fictionisn’t about adhering to the facts of
the known world but the imagined world.
This should be taken as a cause for liberation, but not a license to indulge in
feckless motivations, absurd plot twists, and too-convenient coincidences. We
get enough of those from Hollywood. Writers of literary fiction have a sworn
duty to pursue the truth, even (and especially) when it involves lying through
their teeth.
STEVE ALMOND is a short story writer and essayist and is author of 8 books including Not that
You Asked.

Exercises
1. Look at a draft of your most recent story. Compile a list of the assertions you’re
asking your readers to accept. Do any feel shaky? How might they be made more
solid?
2. Think about your favorite piece of science fiction or magical realism. Consider the
ways in which the author has tried to preserve internal consistency. How can you

apply them to your own work?
3. Think about a recent Hollywood film you found unbelievable. Make a list of the
moments where you “stopped believing,” and why. (Action/adventure movies are
best for this exercise.)
4. Write a realistic scene in which a supernatural event occurs. What measures do
you have to take to ensure plausibility?

Chapter 39

TRANSFORM THAT OUT-OF-SHAPE FIRST DRAFT
BY LIN ENGER
Novelists are the distance runners, the long-haul truckers, the transoceanic
captains of the literary world. There is no sprinting through a novel, at least not
for the novelist; there are simply too many characters, too many scenes, too
many story lines and pages and sentences to be written—and then rewritten,
revised, and polished. Endurance is key to completing the task. Yet endurance is
not enough, not nearly. Because reading the novel is also a marathon experience,
and that means the primary goal of your revision process should be to take pains
to create a human pace for the reader, a pace that alternately rushes, strides,
saunters, and lingers, according to the story’s—and the reader’s—needs. It’s no
small task to keep those narrative wheels rolling, but that’s what you have to do,
all the way from the title page to The End.
As a novelist, you need concrete strategies to sustain you on that long haul—
and to transform your first draft into a work that can stand up to the task. Here
are four rules you can use to make sure your readers won’t fall asleep, burn out,
or just give up before they finish the final chapter of your masterpiece.

1. WRITE THE WHOLE FIRST DRAFT FIRST—AND FAST
This first rule deals not so much with revision, but with resisting the impulse to
revise as you write. This is difficult in large part because it means forgiving
yourself for writing terrible prose. There’s no way around it. Fast means sloppy
—sloppy diction, syntax, grammar. Any damage suffered by your writer’s ego,
however, will come at a small cost compared to the benefits gained.

Truth is, a quickly written draft produces a narrative with a clean trajectory.
Think of it as a carpenter’s chalk line, the graph of your story’s arc. Your
characters might remain undercooked and your subplots unexplored in this first
go-through, but in working fast you have little choice but to hew close to the
basic story line. As a result, you’re saved from the tempting side trails and
seductive tangents that can derail your progress. (You can come back to those
later, when your task is to spice up and thicken your characters and plot, to
pursue all of their wonderful complications.)
Here’s the point: Once you’ve blasted through to the end of a book, you have
a much better sense of what belongs in the beginning and middle sections. And
to your great advantage you won’t have wasted your time writing, revising, and
polishing unnecessary scenes that will only end up on the cutting-room floor.
How fast is fast, you ask? Depends on the writer. My natural habit is to work
slowly, but I wrote the first draft of my current manuscript in six months, an hour
a day, five or six days a week. My objective was to write two pages each time I
sat down, not so daunting a task once I absolved myself in advance for
committing every writer’s sin there is, many times, in every session. If you do
the same—if you dedicate yourself to writing without self-editing—you’ll be
amazed at how soon that draft is finished. Then it’s time for the rewrite, starting
with the element that will sustain your readers on their own marathon: the action.

2. EVALUATE THE DRAMATIC FUNCTION OF EVERY
SCENE OR UNIT OF ACTION
Readers can tell if a passage fails to advance the story in some way. If that’s the
case, they begin to skim, or worse, they toss the book aside. Therefore the best
way to start revising is to begin rereading your first draft and ask yourself this
essential question at the opening of every chapter or scene: “What exactly
happens here, and how does it surprise my character or offer some new
perception to the reader?” Be sure every dramatized incident, whatever it is a
fight, a conversation, or merely a silent moment in which a character ponders

some issue—moves the story to a new place. When you find scenes that don’t,
you’ve found the first targets of your revision.
In Kent Haruf’s Plainsong, a small-town Colorado teacher goes out to visit a
pair of old bachelor farmers/brothers and stuns them (and the readers, too) by
asking if they’d be willing to take in a high school girl who’s been kicked out of
her home because she’s pregnant. The two old men, understandably, are struck
dumb. It’s a lively scene, and the teacher’s request sets into motion a key
element of the novel’s plot.
The next passage, however, is quiet. The teacher has left the farmhouse
kitchen, and the two men put on their coats and go outside into the winter night
to fix a broken water heater. An entire page is spent describing how they chop
free the heater from ice that’s formed in the water tank and how they relight the
pilot—nearly 300 words during which the men don’t say one thing to each other!
Nor does the narrator offer insight into their thoughts. Can such a passage justify
itself? Listen to how it ends and to how Haruf transitions into the inevitable
conversation:
So for a while they stood below the windmill in the failing light. The thirsty
horses approached and peered at them and sniffed at the water and began to
drink, sucking up long draughts of it. Afterward they stood back watching
the two brothers, their eyes as large and luminous as perfect round knobs of
mahogany glass.
It was almost dark now. Only a thin violet band of light showed in the
west on the low horizon.
All right, Harold said. I know what I think. What do you think we do
with her?
The passage in question may not advance the plot directly, but it does
demonstrate the particular way these brothers communicate with each other:
silently, through side-by-side labor. Also, its evocative language makes us feel as

if the horses themselves are grateful, a feeling the reader—consciously or not—
brings to the discussion the brothers are about to have concerning the girl.
Scenes don’t have to be highly dramatic in order to perform valuable work.
Yet it’s important that you examine them one by one, satisfying yourself that
each will deepen your readers’ connection to the story and urge them to turn the
page.
Failing that test, scenes need to be cut—or reworked until they pass.

3. IDENTIFY LULLS IN ACTION WHERE YOU CAN INSERT
MINI SCENES
As novels progress, they inevitably alternate between the modes of scene and
summary. Scenes, of course, depict moments of decision and high emotion,
turning points that demand a full dramatic rendering, complete with dialogue,
action, and vivid descriptions. But intervening periods of time, lulls between
episodes of heavy weather, character histories, and complicated relationships
also must be accounted for. Summaries—long passages of exposition—are a
necessary evil. (All that densely packed prose, with no white space for the eye to
rest upon!)
One way to help your readers persevere through spots where the pacing lags
is to spice up the passages with bits of live action, with mini scenes.
In the first chapter of Jon Hassler’s Staggerford, the narrator spends pages
describing a typical day in the life of Miles Pruitt, a high school English
instructor—a tedious approach had Hassler not interjected several mini-scenes
into the long summary. Notice how smoothly Hassler moves from exposition to
a moment of dry humor. All it requires is a single transitional sentence with the
marker had indicating the shift backward in time:
William Mulholland was in this class. In the Staggerford Public Library
every book having to do with physics, chemistry, statistics, or any other sort
of cold-blooded calculation contained on its check-out card the name

William Mulholland. … Only once had he spoken in this class. On the
opening day of school Miles, taking roll, had said, “Bill Mulholland.”
“My name is William,” he replied.
Toni Morrison uses a similar strategy throughout Beloved, a novel with a
complex structure and wide scope that requires frequent use of summary. In this
passage Sethe, a former slave, is reminiscing about her lost husband, Halle, and
about other slaves she knew on the plantation. Morrison doesn’t use transitional
language at all. She simply plugs in a bit of uttered speech:
Hidden behind honeysuckle she watched them. How different they were
without her, how they laughed and played and urinated and sang. All but
Sixo, who laughed once—at the very end. Halle, of course, was the nicest.
Baby Suggs’ eighth and last child, who rented himself out all over the
country to buy her away from there. But he too, as it turned out, was nothing
but a man.
“A man ain’t nothing but a man,” said Baby Suggs. “But a son? Well
now, that’s somebody.”
Be on the alert, then, in your own work for long paragraphs consisting of
backstory, physical description, and character analysis. The information in such
passages may be necessary, but unless you sprinkle in memorable scenic
elements—snippets of dialogue, little clips of movement— your readers might
lose patience.

4. VARY YOUR METHODS OF BEGINNING CHAPTERS
Chapter breaks and other pauses allow readers to catch their breath, ponder what
they’ve read, and anticipate what might be coming next. As you revise your
novel, don’t miss the opportunity to look at them collectively and make sure
you’re offering a variety of chapter kickoffs to pique your readers. Sometimes
you’ll want to give them what they expect—but a good novelist walks the line

between keeping readers comfortable and making them crazy, so other times it’s
best to startle them.
The most common method of getting a chapter started, one that takes readers
by the hand and gently guides them into the next section of the story, is to
position a character in time and instantly establish the dramatic situation. There’s
nothing flashy about this strategy, but it gets the job done.
On the morning of the twenty-second I wakened with a start. Before I opened
my eyes, I seemed to know that something had happened. I heard excited
voices in the kitchen—grandmother’s was so shrill that I knew she must be
almost beside herself.
—Willa Cather, Chapter 14 of My Ántonia
After Ty left, it took me half an hour to get myself down to my father’s.
—Jane Smiley, Chapter 16 of A Thousand Acres
Another method sketches out a period of time, rendering its mood and general
character as a way to place coming events into context. Use this strategy when
your novel calls for a moment of reflection, requires a bit of backstory, or needs
to make a chronological leap forward. Here’s a writer at his evocative best:
There was music from my neighbor’s house through the summer nights. In
his blue gardens men and girls came and went like moths among the
whisperings and the champagne and the stars.
—F. Scott Fitzgerald, Chapter 3 of The Great Gatsby
Other times, though—especially following chapters that move at a leisurely pace
—you’ll feel the need to shake things up, toss readers in over their heads, pitch
them a curve. In other words, crank up the speed a notch or two. In my novel
Undiscovered Country, chapter 13 begins with the appearance of the narrator’s
dead father in a moment for which neither the narrator nor the reader is prepared.
This time he didn’t smell like gunpowder and beeswax, but instead like he’d

smelled on those nights when he got home late from closing and came into
my room to check on me. … He always reeked of cigarettes from his night at
the Valhalla, but there was also a hint of his spearmint toothpaste and the
soap he was partial to, a tangy brown bar soap peppered with mysterious
black granules. It was this combination of smells that made me glance up
now into the rearview mirror as Charlie and I neared the edge of town.
Dad was in the backseat watching me.
Finally, a clever way to open a chapter is to offer some pithy observation that
bears directly upon the events unfolding. My brother Leif Enger uses this
method to good effect in his novel, So Brave, Young, and Handsome.
Violence seldom issues a warning …
—from chapter 7
It’s an old business, it turns out, this notion that learning a person’s true name
gives you leverage …
—from chapter 4
Or consider this gem from Leo Tolstoy, at the opening of Anna Karenina:
Happy families are all alike; every unhappy family is unhappy in its own
way.
Remember that every new chapter offers the opportunity to reintroduce your
story and reorient your readers to the world of your novel. So as you revise, be
strategic with your chapter openings. Your efforts will stave off reader
complacency and give your novel the chance to hook your readers again and
again.
Are these all strategies you could employ while you write the first draft? I
don’t think so. It’s not until you can stand back and look at that draft as a
cohesive whole that you will be able to apply these rules effectively and give
your manuscript the revision it requires.

Writing and revising a novel means hard work, months or years of it—all the
more reason to keep your readers’ needs at the forefront of your mind as you’re
working. The time and energy invested in your novel doesn’t come to an end,
after all, once you revise the last page, or even after the manuscript has been
edited, produced, and published—because, finally, your readers pour themselves
into it, lay their own claims to it. Keeping this in mind should inspire you to
fashion novels that are enjoyable yet challenging, familiar yet surprising, and as
free of unnecessary hindrances as you can make them.
LIN ENGER is the author of Undiscovered Country. He’s won a James Michener Fellowship and a
Minnesota State Arts Board Fellowship.

FOCUS ON THE WRITING LIFE:
GETTING PUBLISHED

SELLING YOUR FICTION
BY THE EDITORS OF WRITER’S DIGEST
After ten years of writing, Janet Evanovich decided to get serious about getting
published. She had three novels written, all of which “had been sent to and
rejected by a seemingly endless round of publishing houses and agents,” she
says. So she decided to abandon those projects—“big, bizarre books”—and try
her hand at genre writing. Her first effort was rejected, but the second
manuscript was accepted, and she was on her way to becoming the best-selling
author of the Stephanie Plum mystery series. Rather than viewing the similarities
of genre fiction as restrictions against creativity, Evanovich saw them more as
the parameters of publication, and now her books regularly debut at the top of
the best-seller lists.
Science fiction writer Walter H. Hunt waited fourteen years for his novel,
The Dark Wing, to see publication. Written in the late 1980s, the book was sent
to several speculative fiction houses—Ace Book, Baen, Warner, and others—and
rejected, usually because the timing was wrong. “We like the book, but it isn’t
what we’re doing right now,” was a frequent comment from editors. But Hunt’s
patience paid off. “I waited fourteen years for the same editor to get a position at
science fiction publisher Tor Books,” he says. The Dark Wing was published in
2001, followed by The Dark Path, The Dark Ascent, and The Dark Crusade.
Hunt has finally found his readership.

As both Evanovich’s and Hunt’s experiences demonstrate, there are few
straight paths to getting your fiction published. The process is fraught with
circumstances a writer cannot control. Editors change publishing houses or get
laid off. A short story from the slush pile too closely resembles another one just
acquired. Imprints fold. Editorial focus changes. All of these circumstances and
more can conspire to keep a manuscript from finding an editorial home. To
increase your likelihood of success (publication!), it is important that you focus
on the elements of the process a writer can control—the mechanics of fiction
submission.

SELLING YOUR SHORT STORIES
As you probably know, the competition for publishing short fiction is fierce, and
the days when a fiction writer could earn a respectable living writing short
stories are long gone. Only a select few “slick” magazines today even publish
literary short fiction (think The New Yorker, Harper’s, GQ, Esquire, Playboy,
and The Atlantic), and to get an acceptance letter from one of these publications
you’ll need to be writing at the level of the late John Updike. Traditional markets
for more mainstream short fiction—swamped by a heavy volume of submissions
—either do not accept unsolicited submissions or have quit publishing short
stories altogether.
On the other hand, magazines that do publish fiction are always hungry for
new voices, and if you’re willing to investigate the field, you’ll find there are
still healthy markets out there for all types of short fiction, including short shorts
and the interactive fiction called hypertext. Another encouraging development in
the field is the proliferation of online magazines and journals. Finding paper
costs high and subscription numbers too low to sustain production, many
periodicals have either developed websites to complement their print
publications or moved online altogether.
Research

One main key to selling to magazines and literary journals is reading them.
You can tell a lot about an editor’s sensibility by reading the short stories she
chooses to publish and discerning whether or not your work is a good fit for that
publication. It saves postage and time, and it’ll increase your chances of
publication because you’ll end up targeting the right publications. Doing your
research also gives you an opportunity to personally connect with an editor in
your cover letter. Mentioning that you’ve taken the time to read a particular
magazine or journal, and have found your work similar to the types of fiction
they publish, will give you a definite edge over your competition in the slush
pile.
It’s also important to read several back issues of a publication you want to
submit to, and keep track of editorial changes. Sometimes, a venerable literary
publication can undergo a changing of editorial guard, and an incoming editor
significantly changes the tone and feel of that magazine.
Find out what a magazine is looking for in fiction by checking its website. In
addition, you can find detailed guidelines in market directories such as the
annual Novel & Short Story Writer’s Market. But your work is not finished once
you’ve determined whether a publication wants romance, mystery, or literary
short stories. It’s not just what but how. With competition as fierce as in today’s
market, editors need methods for shrinking the slush pile, and one quick way is
to reject outright any submission that doesn’t follow guidelines. Writers are
creative spirits, but in the submission process it’s best to be an utter conformist
and follow to the letter what an editor asks for in submissions. There are no
bonus points for clever, attention-getting gimmicks. Pay attention to the details:
What is the maximum word count? Does a publication accept multiple or
simultaneous submissions, or neither? Will a journal accept electronic
submissions? If not, does the editor want a disposable copy of the manuscript, or
will she return yours? Do you need to enclose a self-addressed stamped
envelope? The full list of particulars is long and important.
Jill Adams, editor of The Barcelona Review, says, “The best advice I can

give is to read the guidelines carefully and take them seriously.” Adams said she
gets frustrated when writers ignore her electronic literary review’s maximum
word length of 4,000 words and send 10,000-word manuscripts, saying that they
couldn’t possibly cut the piece and retain its integrity. “Maybe not,” Adams says.
“But then it’s not the story for our review, and my time—and the writer’s—has
been wasted.”
Revise
Another major key to getting your short fiction published is remembering to
revise. It can be easy in the afterglow of a finished story to want to rush it out
into the world, to share your enthusiasm for your creation with readers. This is
never a good idea. Phil Wagner, editor of the literary journal The Iconoclast,
says, “Do all rewrites before sending a story out. Few editors have time to work
with writers on promising stories; only polished.”
Know that once you’ve finished your short story, what you have is a first
draft, which Michael Seidman in The Complete Guide to Editing Your Fiction
calls “your attempt to quarry a stone.” A story can require an unlimited number
of revisions to reach its full potential. Joyce Carol Oates is known to revise work
of her own that has already been published. Give the manuscript time to become
as polished as you can make it. Joining a writers’ critique group can also be
helpful. In addition to honors (and often cash prizes), contests offer writers the
opportunity to be judged on the basis of quality alone, without the outside factors
that sometimes influence publishing decisions. New writers who win contests
may be published for the first time, while more experienced writers may gain
recognition for an entire body of work.
Submit
When the story is ready and you’ve targeted a publication, it’s time to
submit. If you are submitting by e-mail, send a cover letter to the editor in
question and note that you can send the story as an attachment if the editor
requests it. This is now the standard method of submission, even for small

publications, though there are some editors who still prefer an old-fashioned
submission.
If that is the case, clip a brief cover letter to your short story and mail it to a
specific editor, making sure your submission is addressed to the appropriate
person. Because reading a flat page is simpler than one that’s been folded in
thirds and squashed into a business envelope, send submissions in a manila
envelope, with a stamped, self-addressed return envelope. If the publication
accepts e-mail submissions, follow the instructions carefully; sending an
unreadable file is, obviously, self-defeating.
Cover letters are polite pieces of business correspondence simply acting as
an introduction to your story. They should include the name of the story, a
sentence or two on what it’s about, its word count, a mention of why you’re
sending it to a particular magazine, and a paragraph about who you are. The
cover letter won’t make the sale. That depends on your story. But a sloppy or
typo-ridden one can easily kill it.
Be prepared to be persistent, because magazines, online and on paper, report
being inundated with submissions for fiction. At The Barcelona Review, only
about one of the two hundred submissions it receives each month is accepted,
and sometimes not that many. If your short story is sent back, send it out again.
Always keep a copy for yourself and a record of where and when you sent it. A
submission log can help you keep a record of where and when stories were sent,
which were returned, editors’ comments, and other pertinent information.

SELLING YOUR NOVEL
Finding a publisher for a novel is in many ways like finding a home for your
short fiction—it’s a matter of persistence, talent, and luck. Be aware that success
is not easy in fiction. According to Donald Maass, literary agent and author of
Writing the Breakout Novel, the discouraging fact is that “roughly two-thirds of
all fiction purchases are made because the consumer is already familiar with the

author.” Fiction readers gravitate toward novelists they already know and like,
and it can be hard for a first timer to get a foot in the door.
Success may not be easy, but it is certainly not impossible. It involves first
writing well, then researching publishers and agents, and then sending and
resending material until it reaches someone who appreciates it as much as you
do.
The Outlook
First-time novelists are well advised to learn what they can about changes in
the publishing industry to understand how such changes might affect them.
Before the book publishing industry became consolidated in the later part of the
last century, editors established relationships with writers and cultivated their
work. An editor had the time to recognize potential and coax out of the writer the
best book he could produce. The writer-editor relationship was usually a longterm proposition, with the publishing company looking for its payoff later in the
arc of a writer’s career—on the third or fourth novel, say, when the writer began
to fully realize his talent and develop a following.
Since that time, publishing houses have consolidated into roughly half a
dozen major trade houses, including Simon & Schuster, Random House,
HarperCollins, Macmillan, Penguin Group, and Hachette Book Group—all of
which have numerous specialized imprints under their umbrellas. (Random
House actually gives its sales reps a color flowchart explaining all of the
different imprints like Bantam, Doubleday, Dell, Knopf, Harmony, WaterBrook,
and so on.) Lots of analysis has been devoted to how these changes have altered
the face of publishing and to the reasons behind these changes, but one thing is
certain: At these houses, profit is king, and that has far-reaching ramifications
for writers.
Editors at major houses do not have nearly the amount of time to spend with
their writers as they used to. The result is what you may have heard called “the
death of the midlist author,” or a phenomenon in which blockbuster novelists

continue to publish, and first-time authors are highly sought after as the next
“big thing,” but an author with a modestly selling first novel may well not get a
second chance, at least not with her original publishing house. The publisher
may want to make room in the list for a new author with breakout potential. This
is actually good news for debut novelists, at least in the beginning of their
careers. There is opportunity for writers with talent, determination, and no track
record, who at least have the potential for a hit.
With an Agent
That said, it is increasingly difficult for a first-time writer to get a reading at
one of the major New York houses without an agent. Unwieldy slush piles have
caused the majority to decline unsolicited, unagented submissions, so in many
cases you have to have an agent to even get in the door. There are obvious
advantages to working with an agent. First, she will give you a leg up on finding
the right editor for your manuscript. Agents are industry insiders who know the
tastes of editors at both independent publishers and imprints of the big houses.
Acting as business manager, an agent also handles contracts, rights negotiations,
and royalties, which frees an author’s time for writing. But of course it’s a
service you’ll pay for—the average contract stipulates the agent earns 15 percent
of your book’s domestic sales, and the foreign sales percentage may be higher.
And Without
Many authors choose to work without an agent, and even with the closed
nature of New York City’s publishing houses, they can still succeed in going this
route. Best-selling author Janet Fitch (White Oleander) chose to go it alone and
sold her manuscript to the first editor she approached at Little, Brown. So it can
happen either way. If you do choose not to work with an agent, remember you
are your own business manager. You’ll want to distance yourself from the
passion of your writing and approach the submission process as completely
different from the creative. You will need to precisely meet the submission
specifications of each publisher you’re sending your work to. This will

accomplish the first and most important goal—it will increase your odds of
getting your manuscript read. Don’t make the novice’s mistake of believing an
editor will overlook sloppiness or inattention to detail to find the author is
actually the creative heir to James Joyce. It just doesn’t happen.
Research
When selling your novel, it is imperative that you research the markets
thoroughly. Make a point to familiarize yourself with the industry by getting
closer to it. Here are some ideas for educating yourself about the fiction
publishing world.
Regularly visit publishers’ websites and review what titles are currently on
their list, what titles are upcoming, and whether or not there are any
changes that may affect how you submit your work (like a new imprint).
Visit your public library and regularly read Publishers Weekly. You’ll want
to pay special attention to PW’s First Fiction feature story every year, which
highlights the success stories of debut novelists just like you. Who were
their agents? Why did their novel hook an editor or agent?
Check out the editors’ blogs on www.writersdigest.com. These can be a
great way to educate yourself, as the editors link to publishing news,
discuss trends, and interview editors and agents.
Sign up for the free version of Publishers Lunch, delivered every weekday
to your e-mail in-box. (If you want more detail, you can also pay for a
subscription to the full version of Publishers Lunch.)
Bookstores also hold a wealth of information. Browse the stacks and
familiarize yourself with the fiction being published today. What are you
seeing a lot of? What is consistently popular? What trends are emerging?
Booksellers can be wonderful resources for information about publishing
trends.
Submit

Some book publishers want to see only a query first, but many want a letter
with sample chapters, an outline, or sometimes even the complete manuscript.
As we saw earlier, a query letter is the introduction of writer to editor or agent,
but it is also a sales pitch. It tells enough about the book to intrigue the reader,
mentions the title, offers the author’s credentials and expertise, and asks for a
chance to send in more of the manuscript.
Editors and agents say they look to the query not only for the idea, but also
for a sense of how a writer uses words, and they say they usually can tell if a
person cannot write simply by reading their letters or e-mails. When writers send
an interesting query, Judith Shepard, editor-in-chief of The Permanent Press,
says she also asks them to send the first twenty pages of the manuscript. “If
someone wants to send me a query with the first twenty pages, that’s more
practical,” she says. “What I prefer not to have, but what I get, are full
manuscripts.”
Before mailing or e-mailing anything, put yourself in the place of an editor.
The Permanent Press, which publishes about twelve books a year, receives about
seven thousand submissions annually. “We get so many submissions I almost
hate to see the postman come,” Shepard says. “But if someone is completely
unknown, it’s the letter that gets me. I’m very taken by the words that people use
… how people express themselves. I’m not as interested in the story line.”

CRAFTING A FICTION PROPOSAL
As with nonfiction, there are several key elements to any strong fiction proposal.
Your Query Letter
Before you send the proposal, a query letter is your letter of inquiry. It serves
two functions: to tell editors what you have to offer and to ask if they’re
interested in seeing it. Many editors prefer that you send the query letter either
by itself or with a synopsis and a few sample pages from your novel. This is
called a blind query or a proposal query, because you’re sending it without

having been asked to send it. No matter what you call it, it’s your quick chance
to hook the editor on your novel. If he likes your query, he’ll e-mail back and ask
for either specific parts of your novel proposal (a synopsis and sample chapters,
for example) or the entire manuscript. Then he will decide.
Remember, your query letter is vital. You must make it compelling and
interesting enough to hook your reader. Although every winning query works its
own magic, all good queries should contain the following:
A grabber, or hook, sentence that makes the reader want to get her hands on
the actual novel.
One to three paragraphs about your novel.
A short paragraph about you and your publishing credentials (if you have
any).
A good reason why you’re soliciting the person you’re soliciting. Why this
publisher instead of another?
The length of the novel.
A sentence or two about its intended audience.
An indication that an SASE is enclosed, if you are not using e-mail.
Your Synopsis
If the publisher asks for a synopsis along with the query, you’re lucky—you
have another opportunity to hook an editor. The synopsis supplies key
information about your novel (plot, theme, characterization, setting), while also
showing how all these coalesce to form the big picture (your novel). You want to
quickly tell what your novel is about without making the editor read the
manuscript in its entirety. Remember that editors are extremely busy people.
They are not going to want to read your entire manuscript, and if you send them
a synopsis, you will get in their good graces by saving them valuable time.
There are no hard-and-fast rules about the synopsis. Some editors look at it
as a one-page sales pitch, while others expect it to be a comprehensive summary
of the entire novel. Many editors prefer a short synopsis that runs from one to

two single-spaced pages, or three to five double-spaced pages. On the other
hand, some plot-heavy fiction, such as thrillers and mysteries, may require more
space and can run from ten to twenty-five double-spaced pages, depending on
the length of the manuscript and the number of plot shifts. If you opt for a longer
synopsis, aim for one synopsis page for every twenty-five manuscript pages. But
try to keep it as short as possible.
When compiling your synopsis, be sure to include:
A strong lead sentence.
Logical paragraph organization.
A concise expression of ideas with no repetition.
An introduction of your main characters and their core conflicts.
Plot high points.
Narrative (third-person) writing in the present tense.
Transitions between ideas.
Strong verbs and minimal use of adjectives and adverbs.
Correct punctuation and spelling.
The story’s conclusion. (Yes, you do need to give away the ending.)
Your Outline
An outline is often used interchangeably with a synopsis. For most editors,
however, there is a distinction. While a synopsis is a brief, encapsulated version
of the novel at large, an outline makes each chapter its own story, usually
containing a few paragraphs per chapter. In short, you’re breaking down the
novel and synopsizing each chapter individually. Try to keep each chapter to
about a page, and begin each new chapter on a different page.
Never submit an outline unless an editor asks for it. Fewer and fewer agents
and editors want outlines these days. Most just request a cover or query letter, a
few sample chapters, and a short synopsis. Outlines are most often requested by
genre fiction editors, because genre books have numerous plot shifts.
In compiling your outline, keep in mind:

Your outline is an extended, more detailed and structural version of your
synopsis.
Remember to explain how the plot and character development unfold in the
chapter.
Write in the present tense.
Reveal how the chapter opens and ends.
Make sure the chapters follow sequentially.
Do not include dialogue or extended description.

Appendix A

FICTION GENRE DESCRIPTIONS
ACTION-ADVENTURE. Action is the key element (overshadowing
characters) and involves a quest or military-style mission set in exotic or
forbidding locales such as jungles, deserts, or mountains. The conflict typically
involves spies, mercenaries, terrorists, smugglers, pirates, or other dark and
shadowy figures.
BIOGRAPHICAL NOVEL. A life story documented in history and
transformed into fiction through the insight and imagination of the writer. This
type of novel melds the elements of biographical research and historical truth
into the framework of a novel, complete with dialogue, drama, and mood. A
biographical novel resembles historical fiction, except characters in a historical
novel may be fabricated and then placed into an authentic setting; characters in a
biographical novel have actually lived.
GOTHIC. Contemporary gothic novels are characterized by atmospheric,
historical settings and feature young, beautiful women who win the favor of
handsome, brooding heroes—simultaneously dealing successfully with some
life-threatening menace, either natural or supernatural. Gothics rely on mystery,
peril, romantic relationships, and a sense of foreboding for their strong,
emotional effect on the reader. A classic early gothic novel is Emily Brontë’s
Wuthering Heights.
HISTORICAL FICTION. A fictional story set in a period of history. As well as
telling the stories of ordinary people’s lives, historical fiction may involve
political or social events of the time.

HORROR. Howard Phillips (H.P.) Lovecraft, a master of the horror tale in the
twentieth century, distinguished horror literature from fiction based entirely on
physical fear and the merely gruesome. “The true weird tale has something more
than secret murder, bloody bones, or a sheeted form clanking chains according to
rule. A certain atmosphere of breathless and unexplainable dread of outer,
unknown forces must be present; there must be a hint, expressed with a
seriousness and portentousness becoming its subject, of that most terrible
concept of the human brain—a malign and particular suspension or defeat of the
fixed laws of Nature which are our only safeguards against the assaults of chaos
and the daemons of unplumbed space.” It is that atmosphere—the creation of a
particular sensation or emotional level—that, according to Lovecraft, is the most
important element in the creation of horror literature. Contemporary writers
enjoying considerable success in horror fiction include Stephen King and Dean
Koontz.
MYSTERY. A form of narration in which one or more elements remain
unknown or unexplained until the end of the story. The modern mystery story
contains elements of the serious novel: a convincing account of a character’s
struggle with various physical and psychological obstacles in an effort to achieve
his goal, good characterization, and sound motivation.
POPULAR FICTION. Generally a synonym for category or genre fiction; that
is, fiction intended to appeal to audiences of certain kinds of novels. Popular, or
category, fiction is defined as such primarily for the convenience of publishers,
editors, reviewers, and booksellers who must identify novels of different areas of
interest for potential readers.
PSYCHOLOGICAL. A narrative that emphasizes the mental and emotional
aspects of its characters, focusing on motivations and mental activities rather
than on exterior events. The psychological novelist is less concerned about
relating what happened than about exploring why it happened.

ROMAN À CLEF. The French term for “novel with a key.” This type of novel
incorporates real people and events into the story under the guise of fiction.
Robert Penn Warren’s All the King’s Men, in which the character Willie Stark
represents Huey Long, is a novel in this genre.
ROMANCE. The romance novel is a type of category fiction in which the love
relationship between a man and a woman pervades the plot. The story is often
told from the viewpoint of the heroine, who meets a man (the hero), falls in love
with him, encounters a conflict that hinders their relationship, then resolves the
conflict. Romance is the overriding element in this kind of story: The couple’s
relationship determines the plot and tone of the book, and the characters and plot
both must be well-developed and realistic: Contrived situations and flat
characters are unacceptable. Throughout a romance novel, the reader senses the
sexual and emotional attraction between the heroine and hero.
SCIENCE FICTION AND FANTASY. Science fiction can be defined as
literature involving elements of science and technology as a basis for conflict or
as the setting for a story. The science and technology are generally extrapolations
of existing scientific fact, and most science fiction stories take place in the
future. There are other definitions of science fiction, and much disagreement in
academic circles as to just what constitutes science fiction and what constitutes
fantasy. This is because in some cases the line between science fiction and
fantasy is virtually nonexistent. It is generally accepted that, to be science
fiction, a story must have elements of science. Fantasy, on the other hand, rarely
involves science, relying instead on magic and mythological beings.
Contemporary science fiction, while maintaining its focus on science and
technology, is more concerned with the effects of science and technology on
people. Since science is such an important factor in writing science fiction,
accuracy with reference to science fact is important. Most of the science in
science fiction is hypothesized from known facts, so in addition to being firmly
based in fact, the extrapolations must be consistent.

TECHNO-THRILLER. This genre shares many of the same elements as the
thriller, with one major difference. In techno-thrillers, technology becomes a
major character, such as in Tom Clancy’s The Hunt for Red October.
THRILLER. A novel intended to arouse feelings of excitement or suspense.
Works in this genre are highly sensational, usually focusing on illegal activities,
international espionage, sex, and violence. A thriller is often a detective story in
which the forces of good are pitted against the forces of evil in a kill-or-be-killed
situation.

MYSTERY SUBGENRES
CLASSIC MYSTERY (WHODUNIT). A crime (almost always a murder or
series of murders) is solved. The detective is the viewpoint character; the reader
never knows any more or less about the crime than the detective, and all the
clues to solving the crime are available to the reader.
AMATEUR DETECTIVE. As the name implies, the detective is not a
professional detective (private or otherwise) but is almost always a professional
something. This professional association routinely involves the protagonist in
criminal cases (in a support capacity), gives her a special advantage in a specific
case, or provides the contacts and skills necessary to solve a particular crime.
(Examples: Jonathan Kellerman, Patricia Cornwell)
COZY. A special class of the amateur detective category that frequently features
a female protagonist (Agatha Christie’s Miss Marple stories are the classic
example). There is less onstage violence than in other categories, and the plot is
often wrapped up in a final scene where the detective identifies the murderer and
explains how the crime was solved. In contemporary stories, the protagonist can
be anyone from a chronically curious housewife to a mystery-buff clergyman to

a college professor, but she is usually quirky, even eccentric. (Examples: Susan
Isaacs, Lillian Jackson Braun)
PRIVATE DETECTIVE. When described as hard-boiled, this category takes a
tough stance. Violence is more prominent, characters are darker, the detective—
while almost always licensed by the state—operates on the fringes of the law,
and there is often open resentment between the detective and law enforcement.
More “enlightened” male detectives and a crop of contemporary females have
brought about new trends in this category. (For female P.I.s—Sue Grafton, Sara
Paretsky; for male P.I.s—John D. MacDonald, Lawrence Sanders, Robert B.
Parker)
POLICE PROCEDURALS. The most realistic category, these stories require
the most meticulous research. A police procedural may have more than one
protagonist, since cops rarely work alone. Conflict between partners, or between
the detective and her superiors, is a common theme. But cops are portrayed
positively as a group, even though there may be a couple of bad or ineffective
law enforcement characters for contrast and conflict. Jurisdictional disputes are
still popular sources of conflict as well. (Example: Ridley Pearson)
HISTORICAL. May be any category or subcategory of mystery, but with an
emphasis on setting, the details of which must be diligently researched. But
beyond the historical details (which must never overshadow the story), the plot
develops along the lines of its contemporary counterpart. (Examples: Candace
Robb, Caleb Carr, Anne Perry)
SUSPENSE/THRILLER. Where a classic mystery is always a whodunit, a
suspense/thriller novel may deal more with the intricacies of the crime, what
motivated it, and how the villain (whose identity may be revealed to the reader
early on) is caught and brought to justice. Novels in this category frequently
employ multiple points of view and have a broader scope than a more traditional
murder mystery. The crime may not even involve murder—it may be a threat to

global economy or regional ecology; it may be technology run amok or abused
at the hands of an unscrupulous scientist; it may involve innocent citizens
victimized for personal or corporate gain. Its perpetrators are kidnappers,
stalkers, serial killers, rapists, pedophiles, computer hackers, or just about
anyone with an evil intention and the means to carry it out. The protagonist may
be a private detective or law enforcement official but is just as likely to be a
doctor, lawyer, military officer, or other individual in a unique position to
identify the villain and bring her to justice. (Examples: James Patterson, Michael
Connelly)
ESPIONAGE. The international spy novel is less popular since the end of the
Cold War, but stories can still revolve around political intrigue in unstable
regions. (Examples: John le Carré, Ken Follett)
MEDICAL THRILLER. The plot can involve a legitimate medical threat (such
as the outbreak of a virulent plague) or the illegal or immoral use of medical
technology. In the former scenario, the protagonist is likely to be the doctor (or
team) who identifies the virus and procures the antidote; in the latter, she could
be a patient (or the relative of a victim) who uncovers the plot and brings down
the villain. (Examples: Robin Cook, Michael Crichton)
COURTROOM DRAMA. The action takes place primarily in the courtroom;
the protagonist is generally a defense attorney out to prove the innocence of her
client by finding the real culprit. (Examples: Scott Turow, John Grisham)
WOMAN IN JEOPARDY. A murder or other crime may be committed, but the
focus is on the woman (and/or her children) currently at risk, her struggle to
understand the nature of the danger, and her eventual victory over her tormentor.
The protagonist makes up for her lack of physical prowess with intellect or
special skills, and solves the problem on her own or with the help of her family
(but she runs the show). Closely related to this category is the romantic
suspense. But, while the heroine in a romantic suspense is certainly a woman in

jeopardy, the mystery or suspense element is subordinate to the romance.
(Example: Mary Higgins Clark)

ROMANCE SUBGENRES
HISTORICAL. Setting is especially significant here, and details must be
thoroughly researched and accurately presented. Some specific historical
romance categories include:
GOTHIC. Historical with a strong element of suspense and a feeling of
supernatural events, although these events frequently have a natural
explanation. Setting plays an important role in establishing a dark, moody,
suspenseful atmosphere. (Example: Victoria Holt)
HISTORICAL FANTASY. Traditional fantasy elements of magic and
magical beings, frequently set in a medieval society. (Examples: Jayne Ann
Krentz, Kathleen Morgan)
EARLY AMERICA. Usually Revolution to Civil War, set in New England
or the South, or frontier stories set in the American West.
REGENCY. Set in England from 1811–1820.
CATEGORY OR SERIES. These are published in specific lines or imprints by
individual publishing houses (such as Harlequin and Silhouette); each line has its
own requirements as to word length, story content, and amount of sex.
SINGLE-TITLE CONTEMPORARY. Longer contemporary romances that do
not necessarily conform to the requirements of a specific romance line and
therefore feature more complex plots and nontraditional characters.
EROTICA. Deals mainly with the characters’ sex lives and features graphic
descriptions.

GLITZ. So called because they feature generally wealthy characters with highpowered positions in careers that are considered to be glamorous—high finance,
modeling/acting, publishing, fashion—and are set in exciting or exotic (often
metropolitan) locales such as Monte Carlo, Hollywood, London, or New York.
(Examples: Judith Krantz, Jackie Collins)
ROMANTIC COMEDY. Has a fairly strong comic premise and/or a comic
perspective in the author’s voice or the voices of the characters (especially the
heroine). (Example: Jennifer Crusie)
ROMANTIC SUSPENSE. With a mystery or psychological thriller subplot in
addition to the romance plot. (Examples: Barbara Michaels, Tami Hoag, Nora
Roberts, Catherine Coulter)
PARANORMAL. Containing elements of the supernatural or science
fiction/fantasy. There are numerous subcategories (many stories combine
elements of more than one) including:
TIME TRAVEL. One or more of the characters travels to another time—
usually the past—to find love. (Examples: Jude Deveraux, Diana Gabaldon)
SCIENCE FICTION/FUTURISTIC. Science-fiction elements are used for
the story’s setting: imaginary worlds, parallel universes, Earth in the near or
distant future. (Examples: Jayne Ann Krentz, J.D. Robb)
CONTEMPORARY FANTASY. From modern ghost and vampire stories to
New Age themes such as extraterrestrials and reincarnation. (Example: Linda
Lael Miller)
MULTICULTURAL. Most currently feature African-American couples, but
editors are looking for other ethnic stories as well. Multiculturals can be
contemporary or historical and fall into any subcategory.
CHRISTIAN. Feature an inspirational, Christian message centering on the

spiritual dynamic of the romantic relationship and faith in God as the foundation
for that relationship; sensuality is played down. (Examples: Janette Oke, Karen
Kingsbury)

Appendix B

RESOURCES
BOOKS
Beginning Writer’s Answer Book edited by Jane Friedman
Bird by Bird: Some Instructions on Writing and Life by Anne Lamott
The Complete Handbook of Novel Writing, 2nd Edition edited by the editors of
Writer’s Digest
Dear Genius: The Letters of Ursula Nordstrom collected and edited by Leonard
S. Marcus
Fiction: The Art and Craft of Writing and Getting Published by Michael
Seidman
Fiction Writer’s Workshop by Josip Novakovich
The First Five Pages: A Writer’s Guide to Staying Out of the Rejection Pile and
The Plot Thickens: 8 Ways to Bring Fiction to Life by Noah Lukeman
How to Write a Damn Good Novel by James N. Frey
How to Write & Sell Your First Novel, revised edition by Oscar Collier with
Frances Spatz Leighton
If You Want to Write: A Book About Art, Independence, and Spirit by Brenda
Ueland
Imaginative Writing: The Elements of Craft by Janet Burroway

The Indie Author Guide: Self-Publishing Strategies Anyone Can Use by April L.
Hamilton
Novel & Short Story Writer’s Market
The Playful Way to Serious Writing: An Anything-Can-Happen Workbook to
Inspire and Delight by Roberta Allen
Yoga for the Brain: Daily Writing Stretches That Keep Minds Flexible and
Strong by Dawn DiPrince and Cheryl Miller Thurston
Wild Mind: Living the Writer’s Life by Natalie Goldberg
On Writing: A Memoir of the Craft by Stephen King
Poemcrazy: Freeing Your Life With Words by Susan Goldsmith Wooldridge
The Write-Brain Workbook: 366 Exercises to Liberate Your Writing and Take Ten
for Writers: Generate Ideas and Stimulate Your Writing in Only 10 Minutes a
Day by Bonnie Neubauer
Write Great Fiction: Plot & Structure by James Scott Bell
Write Great Fiction: Characters, Emotion & Viewpoint by Nancy Kress
Write Great Fiction: Dialogue by Gloria Kempton
Write Great Fiction: Description & Setting by Ron Rozelle
Write Great Fiction: Revision & Self-Editing by James Scott Bell
Writing the Breakout Novel by Donald Maass
The Writing & Critique Group Survival Guide: How to Give and Receive
Feedback, Self-Edit, and Make Revisions by Becky Levine
You Can Write a Novel, 2nd Edition, by James V. Smith, Jr.

WEBSITES
Absolute Write (www.absolutewrite.com). Provides comprehensive information
for writers—no matter what your skill level.
Agent Query (www.agentquery.com). Search over nine hundred reputable agents
for free.
The Association of Authors’ Representatives (www.aar-online.com). Find
information about agents who meet professional standards and subscribe to a
canon of ethics.
Author Buzz (www.authorbuzz.com). Get in touch with readers, booksellers,
and librarians and partners with online publications like DearReader.com and
Shelf-Awareness.com.
Authorlink (www.authorlink.com). An excellent site for news about publishing
and articles about writing.
Book Docs (www.bookdocs.com). Provides manuscript evaluations,
developmental and line editing, consultation on book proposals and conceptual
development, and ghostwriting and collaboration.
Book Market (www.bookmarket.com). Lists book publishing statistics, free
marketing advice, book promotion advice, Internet marketing resources, author
resources, publishers resources, free downloads, and a subscription for John
Kremer’s Book Marketing Tip of the Week.
Booktalk (www.booktalk.com). Promising “all the buzz about books,” this site
offers connections to publishers and agents, and some news about the industry.
Library Thing (www.librarything.com). Create an author page, promote your
books to potentially interested readers, and connect with readers. Plus, you can

catalog your library, get reading suggestions, and participate in groups and
discussions.
Editcetera (www.editcetera.com). Offers coaching and ghostwriting, crafting of
book proposal and sample chapters, developmental editing of a first draft, and
line editing of a late draft.
Guide to Literary Agents (www.guidetoliteraryagents.com/blog). Read
interviews and articles from writers and agent.
Poets & Writers (www.pw.org). Offers links to workshops, services, and
publications of interest to writers.
Red Room (www.redroom.com). Get an online home page, professional
coaching and editing services, and a place to discuss and buy books.
Sisters in Crime (www.sinc-ic.org). A good site for mystery writers, male and
female.
Writer’s Digest (www.writersdigest.com). In addition to its own excellent
information, this site also links to the 101 Best Websites for writers of all kinds.
Writer’s Market (www.writersmarket.com). Like its print companion, Writer’s
Market, this site provides up-to-date listings of publishers and agents, with a tool
that helps you keep track of where you’ve submitted and when.
Writers Write (www.writerswrite.com). Offers reviews, interviews, and articles
on craft.

Permissions
“Amp up Dialogue With Emotional Beats.” Excerpted from Novelist’s Boot
Camp © 2006 by Todd A. Stone, with permission of Writer’s Digest Books.
“Balancing Description & Summary.” Excerpted from Write Great Fiction:
Description and Setting © 2005 by Ron Rozelle, with permission of Writer’s
Digest Books.
“Choosing Your Character’s Profession” © 2006 by Michael J. Vaughn.
Originally appeared in Writer’s Digest, August 2006. Used with permission of
the author.
“Craft an Opening Scene That Lures Readers Into Chapter Two.” Excerpted
from Hooked © 2007 by Les Edgerton, with permission of Writer’s Digest
Books.
“Create the (Im)perfect Heroic Couple.” Excerpted from On Writing Romance ©
2007 by Leigh Michaels, with permission of Writer’s Digest Books.
“Create Vicious Villains” © 2006 by Charles Atkins. Originally appeared in
Writer’s Digest, August 2006. Used with permission of the author.
“Creating Your Story’s Time & Place.” Excerpted from Writing the Breakout
Novel © 2002 by Donald Maass, with permission of Writer’s Digest Books.
“Creative Lollygagging: Work Harder at Working Less.” © 2006 by Michael J.
Vaughn. Originally appeared in Writer’s Digest, December 2006. Used with
permission of the author.
“Depicting Convincing Relationships” © 2011 by Elizabeth Sims. Originally
appeared in Writer’s Digest, February 2011. Used with permission of the author.

“Draw Characters From the Strongest Sources.” Excerpted from Write Great
Fiction: Characters, Emotions & Viewpoint © 2005 by Nancy Kress, with
permission of Writer’s Digest Books.
“Emotion-Driven Characters” © 2011 by David Corbett. Originally appeared in
Writer’s Digest January 2011. Used with permission of the author.
“Fire Up Your Fiction: Four Techniques.” Excerpted from The Fire in Fiction ©
2009 by Donald Maass, with permission of Writer’s Digest Books.
“Follow the Rules for Stronger Writing.” Excerpted from The Art and Craft of
Storytelling © 2008 by Nancy Lamb, with permission of Writer’s Digest Books.
“Fueling Your Muse With Compost.” Excerpted from Page After Page © 2009
by Heather Sellers, with permission of Writer’s Digest Books.
“Get Off Your Butt & Write.” Excerpted from The Writer’s Market Guide to
Getting Published © 2010 by The Editors of Writer’s Digest, with permission
from Writer’s Digest Books.
“How to Build Suspense With Backstory.” Excerpted from On Writing Romance
© 2007 by Leigh Michaels, with permission of Writer’s Digest Books.
“How to Gain Perspective on Your Work” © 2011 by Elizabeth Sims. Originally
appeared in Writer’s Digest, August 2011. Used with permission of the author.
“Keep Your Story Lean” © 2006 by Nancy Kress. Originally appeared in
Writer’s Digest, March 2006. Used with permission of the author.
“Keep Your Story Moving at the Right Pace.” Excerpted from Between the Lines
© 2006 by Jessica Page Morrell, with permission of Writer’s Digest Books.
“Make Your Own Muse.” Excerpted from The Constant Art of Being a Writer ©
2009 by N.M. Kelby, with permission of Writer’s Digest Books.

“Make Your Tone Pitch-Perfect” © 2011 by Adair Lara. Originally appeared in
Writer’s Digest, July/August 2011. Used with permission of the author.
“Map Your Novel With a Reverse Outline.” Excerpted from The Constant Art of
Being a Writer © 2009 by N.M. Kelby, with permission of Writer’s Digest
Books.
“Marry Your Life to Your Writing” © 2010 by Sheila Bender. Originally
appeared in Writer’s Digest, February 2010. Used with permission of the author.
“Mastering Multiple Points of View” © 2007 by Simon Wood. Originally
appeared in Writer’s Digest, February 2007. Used with permission of the author.
“POV Characters Who Overstep Their Bounds” © 2006 by Kristen Johnson
Ingram. Originally appeared in Writer’s Digest, April 2006. Used with
permission of the author.
“Put Your Fiction to the Plausibility Test” © 2006 by Steve Almond. Originally
appeared in Writer’s Digest, April 2009. Used with permission of the author.
“Refine Your Setting Skill Set.” Excerpted from The 4 a.m Breakthrough © 2005
by Brian Kiteley, with permission of Writer’s Digest Books.
“Reinventing Your Relationship With Time.” Excerpted from The Productive
Writer © 2010 by Sage Cohen, with permission of Writer’s Digest Books.
“Rescue Your Story From Plot Pitfalls.” Excerpted from Novel Shortcuts © 2009
by Laura Whitcomb, with permission of Writer’s Digest Books.
“Researching Your Ideas.” Excerpted from The Writer’s Market Guide to Getting
Published © 2010 by The Editors of Writer’s Digest, with permission of Writer’s
Digest Books.
“Selling Your Fiction.” Excerpted from The Writer’s Market Guide to Getting
Published © 2010 by The Editors of Writer’s Digest, with permission of Writer’s

Digest Books.
“Six Ways to Layer in Backstory.” Excerpted from Writing and Selling Your
Mystery Novel © 2005 by Hallie Ephron, with permission of Writer’s Digest
Books.
“Start Me Up” © 2006 by Elizabeth Sims. Originally appeared in Writer’s Digest
December 2006. Used with permission of the author.
“Story Trumps Structure” © 2011 by Steven James. Originally appeared in
Writer’s Digest February 2011. Used with permission of the author.
“Strengthen Your Scenes.” Excerpted from Write Great Fiction: Revision and
Self-Editing © 2008 by James Scott Bell, with permission of Writer’s Digest
Books.
“Three Techniques for Crafting Your Villain.” Excerpted from Writing and
Selling Your Mystery Novel © 2005 by Hallie Ephron, with permission of
Writer’s Digest Books.
“Transform that Out-of-Shape First Draft” © 2010 by Lin Enger. Originally
appeared in Writer’s Digest January 2010. Used with permission of the author.
“Avoid Writing Same-Old, Same-Old Conversations” © 2006 by Michael Levin.
Originally appeared in Writer’s Digest, January 2006. Used with permission of
the author.
“Understanding Differences in POV.” Excerpted from Writer’s Little Helper ©
2006 by James V. Smith Jr., with permission of Writer’s Digest Books.
“Understanding Gender Differences” © 2010 by Leigh Anne Jasheway.
Originally appeared in Writer’s Digest May/June 2010. Used with permission of
the author.
“Use Braiding to Layer Your Story Line.” Excerpted from Chapter After

Chapter © 2006 by Heather Sellers, with permission of Writer’s Digest Books.
“Using Perception to Enhance Your POV.” Excerpted from The Power of Point
of View © 2008 by Alicia Rasley, with permission of Writer’s Digest Books.
“Weave Action, Narrative, & Dialogue.” Excerpted from Write Great Fiction:
Dialogue © 2004 by Gloria Kempton, used with permission of Writer’s Digest
Books.
“Weave in Backstory to Reveal Character.” Excerpted from Breathing Life Into
Your Characters © 2009 by Rachel Ballon, used with permission of Writer’s
Digest Books.
“What to Do When Your Novel Stalls” © 2011 by John Dufresne. Originally
appeared in Writer’s Digest January 2011. Used with permission of the author.
“Why Backstory Is Essential.” Excerpted from Story Engineering © 2011 by
Larry Brooks, used with permission of Writer’s Digest Books.
“Write a Five-Star Chapter One” © 2011 by Elizabeth Sims. Originally appeared
in Writer’s Digest January 2011. Used with permission of the author.
“The Write-At-Home Mom.” Excerpted from Writer Mama © 2007 by Christina
Katz, with permission of Writer’s Digest Books.
“Write Well-Crafted Scenes to Support Your Story.” Excerpted from The Art of
War for Writers © 2009 by James Scott Bell, used with permission of Writer’s
Digest Books.
“Your Novel Blueprint.” Excerpted from From First Draft to Finished Novel ©
2008 by Karen S. Wiesner, used with permission of Writer’s Digest Books.

CRAFTING NOVELS & SHORT STORIES. Copyright © 2011 by The Editors of Writer’s Digest.
All rights reserved. No other part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or
mechanical means including information storage and retrieval systems without permission in writing from
the publisher, except by a reviewer, who may quote brief passages in a review.
Published by Writer’s Digest Books, an imprint of F+W Media, Inc., 10151 Carver Road, Suite # 200, Blue
Ash, OH 45242. (800) 289-0963. First edition.
ePub ISBN: 978-1-59963-573-6
This ebook edition: April 2012
For more resources for writers, visit www.writersdigest.com/books.
To receive a free weekly e-mail newsletter delivering tips and updates about writing and about Writer’s
Digest products, register directly at www.writersdigest.com/enews.

Edited by Melissa Wuske
Print edition designed by Claudean Wheeler Production coordinated by Debbie Thomas


